Around the year 1333, the North African writer
and traveler Ibn Battuta went on a journey
around all of Asia that would take him
to India and over the sea to Sri Lanka,
Bangladesh, Malaysia, and eventually on to his
final destination of China. But the first leg
of this journey took him along the winding roads
over land from Constantinople. He traveled past
the shores of the Black and Caspian Seas, over
vast grasslands, and on southwards through the
deserts of Central Asia in what is now Kazakhstan,
Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan. Ibn Battuta had heard
marvelous stories about the opulent cities
that lay along the vast trade route known as
the Silk Road, which laced across the continent
of Asia. These were the cities of Balkh, Bukhara, and
Samarqand. First, he visited the city of Bukhara,
once the jewel of Islamic learning, a city
of enormous libraries and colleges. But
to his disappointment, when he arrived,
he found the city a much reduced
place, as he wrote in his
journal. We traveled for a whole day
through contiguous orchards, with streams,
trees, and habitations, and arrived at the city
of Bukhara. This city was formerly the capital
of the lands beyond the river Jaihiin, but was laid in
ruins so at the present time its mosques, colleges,
and bazaars are in ruins, all but a few, and its
inhabitants are looked down upon. There is not
one person in it today who possesses any religious
learning or who shows any concern for acquiring it.
Surprised at the sorry sight of
the once great city of Bukhara, Ibn
Battuta continued on to the opulent metropolis of
Samarqand. I journeyed to the city of
Samarqand, once one of the greatest and
finest of cities, and most perfect of them in
beauty. It is built on the bank of the river
called the Wadil-Wassarin, along which there
are water wheels to supply water to the
orchards. But when he arrived at the
oasis of Samarqand, he found it, too, was
in a much diminished state. The city
was sparsely inhabited, its legendary
walls torn down long ago, and its
grand buildings standing in ruins.
There were formerly great palaces on the river
bank and constructions which bear witness to the
lofty aspirations of the townsfolk, but most of
this is obliterated, and most of the city itself
has also fallen into ruin. It has no city wall and
no gates, and there is vegetation growing inside
it. Ibn Battuta soon left that melancholy place and
continued on his journey. Finally, he passed through
the city of Balkh, now in northern Afghanistan.
This had once been another wealthy trade hub
and a center for the Zoroastrian religion. From a
distance, he could see its tall buildings rising
out of the river plains. But as he got closer,
he saw no smoke of cooking fires, no animals
in the fields, no traffic of people in its
streets. An eerie feeling must have crept up on
him. Next we crossed the river Jaihiin into the land of
Khurasan and marched for a day and a half, crossing
the river through uninhabited desert and sands
to the city of Balkh. It is completely dilapidated and
uninhabited, but anyone seeing it would think it to
still be inhabited because of the solidity of its
construction, for it was a vast and important city.
Its mosques and colleges preserve their outward
appearance even now, with the inscriptions
on their buildings incised with lapis-blue
paints. As he passed through this devastated
region, he heard stories about other ruined
cities lying out in the desert, now so empty
of life that they could offer no shelter to
travelers. The great cities of Khurasan
are four; two of them are inhabited,
namely Herat and Nishapur, and
two are in ruins, namely Balkh and Merv.
Had he journeyed out to the city of Merv, he would
have found an even more devastated ruin, just a
series of jagged earthen remains rising out of the
cracked salt flats of the desert, home only to
owls and wild dogs, where once a city of half
a million people had stood. Everywhere across
this region, the cities bore the scars of one of
the Middle Ages’ most momentous and world-changing
events. This was the uniting of a nomadic
people who called themselves the Mongols. From
their homeland far away in the steppe grasslands
of East Asia, the Mongols had fused their anarchic
pastoral culture into a war machine that has had
few equals in history, and forged an empire that
would stretch across much of the landmass of Asia,
the largest continuous land empire in history.
In almost every land they touched, they would
bring destruction and death, fear and anguish,
but in places they also laid the foundation
for our modern world. As Ibn Battuta stood in
the abandoned streets of Balkh, Samarqand, and Bukhara,
he must have wondered at the unlikely story of these
strange nomadic conquerors. He must have wandered
those ruined palaces and crumbled places of
worship, those empty markets and dilapidated
houses, and asked himself, where had these
mysterious conquerors come from? What did they want,
and why had no one been able to stop them?
My name's Paul Cooper, and you're listening to
The Fall of Civilizations Podcast. Each episode,
I look at a civilization of the past that rose
to glory and then collapsed into the ashes of
history. I want to ask, what did they have in
common? What led to their fall, and what did it
feel like to be a person alive at the time who
witnessed the end of their world? In this episode,
I want to tell one of the most remarkable and
unlikely stories from medieval history, the story
of the Mongol Empire. I want to show how this
group of nomadic horse-riders united the
peoples of the Mongolian steppe and forged them
into a truly unique kind of state. I want to
describe how they conquered much of the lands
of Eurasia and brought the distant cultures of
China, Persia, the Middle East, and Europe into
contact, and I want to tell the story of how
the world's largest land empire finally came
apart and left the world as we know it in its wake.
The Eurasian steppe is the largest grassland
on Earth. It's a vast corridor of seasonal savannas
that run virtually the entire length of Asia, and
covers around 7% of the planet's land surface.
It stretches from Hungary and Poland in Eastern
Europe more than 8,000 km, passing over mountain
ranges and rolling hills, past salty inland seas
and sandy deserts, and over countless rivers until
it reaches Northern China and the forests of
Manchuria on the Pacific Coast. The word steppe entered
English from the Russian language, with its origin
possibly rooted in the old Slavic word sutepi, which
means a place that is flat and bare. The Russian
author Anton Chekhov describes the landscape of the
steppe. A plain, broad, boundless, girdled by a chain
of hills, lies stretched before the traveler's eyes.
The hills merge into rising ground, extending
to the very horizon, and disappearing into the
lilac-hued far distance. On and on you travel, but
where it all begins and where it ends, you just
cannot make out. Coarse steppe grass, milkwood, wild
hemp; all are drenched in dew and caressed by the
sun. The green forested lands of China and Europe
receive moisture from the winds blowing in from
the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans, meaning that they
can support large trees, forests, and all manner of
crops. But the lands of the steppe receive most of
their airflow from the north, from the frozen
polar ocean of the Arctic. Cold air cannot hold
much moisture, and what little it contains falls
as rain in the northern mountains, where the
great, frozen pine forests of Siberia stretch.
The low rainfall on the steppe means that trees
cannot survive, and even species of long grasses
find it difficult to take root. As a result, all
that remains here are the hardiest species of
short grasses. For this reason, the steppe has
always supported massive herds of grazing
animals. The first humans to set foot on the
steppe arrived about 40,000 years ago. They were
hunter-gatherers who lived off what the
land provided. In its rolling grassland,
they hunted mammoths, then once those had
died out, boar, antelope, goats, and aurochs,
and one animal that lived in
the steppe in abundance; the wild
horse. Horses evolved in North America around
4 million years ago, but had crossed over to
Asia during one of the last ice ages, when a land
bridge existed between Alaska and Eastern Russia.
Humans and horses would one day form one of the
most successful partnerships in history, but
our fascination with them goes back even further.
Horses are the animal most frequently depicted
in the oldest prehistoric cave paintings, even in
those of Chauvet Cave in France, which are more than
30,000 years old, and predate the domestication of
the horse by 25 millennia. For all these thousands
of years, humankind had looked on the horse
as a symbol of power, grace, and perhaps also
freedom. When people arrived on the
Eurasian steppe, they initially hunted horses
for food like any other animal, with horse bones
showing up in slaughter sites from at least 10,000
years ago. But sometime around 6,000 years ago,
they began to be kept as livestock. Humans first
used horses for milk and meat alongside their
cattle, sheep, and goats, but over the following
thousand years or so, humans learned that if a
horse was sufficiently tamed, it would allow a
human to ride on its back. We will never know which
daring young man or woman first leapt up onto the
back of a horse and braved the inevitable bucking
and kicking that every horse breaker must learn to
endure, but when they did, they changed the course
of human history. Around 5,000 years ago, we begin
to see evidence of horse-riding on the Eurasian
steppe. One burial site in Botai in northern Kazakhstan
contains the bones of horses, with the earliest
signs of wear on the teeth and jawbones that
suggest they had worn a metal bit in their mouths
for much of their life, which could be attached to
reins for a rider. This development occurred at a
momentous time in human history. Around the world,
the earliest cities were just then coalescing in
Egypt, Mesopotamia, China, and elsewhere, and a new
way of human life was taking shape. This new
lifestyle was based on the planting of grain,
the making of pottery, and the building of fixed
dwellings. Soon came hierarchies and religions,
priests and kings, armies and city walls. From
this settled way of life, the first written
words would be set down, cut into clay tablets
in the Sumerian cities of Ur and Uruk, carved
into the stone temples of Egypt, and into shoulder
bones and tortoise shells in China. But it's clear
that in the vast expanse of the Eurasian steppe, an
equally dramatic revolution was taking place.
It's around this time that the first mention of
horses begins to appear in the written texts of
the Sumerians. They would call them by the name
anše-kurra, meaning donkey of the mountains, since
they first arrived from the mountainous north.
One Sumerian text written more than 4,000 years
ago is one of the first to mention this new
animal, describing the hero god Lugulbanda as
being as swift as a mountain horse. Holy
Lugulbanda came out from the mountain cave, and
from that spot he sped away like a horse of
the mountains. Like a lone wild ass, he darted
over the mountains; like a large, powerful donkey he
raced; a slim donkey, eager to run, he bounded along.
Human life had just sped up considerably, and
the domestication of the horse
would change life on the steppe
forever. A herder traveling by foot can cover a
maximum of only about 30 km a day, which limits
how large his flock can be and how far he
could range in search of new grazing lands.
But riding on the back of a horse meant you
could cover more than 100 km at a push, and
you could travel at five times the speed over
a short distance. With greater ability to cover
large areas, you could also effectively
manage much larger herds, and with more
food available, you could establish ever bigger
families and social groups. While all around the
world other peoples were settling down into
ever larger cities built of mudbrick and
stone, the people of the steppe were developing a
parallel way of life, a life constantly on the
move. After the horse, people in the
Western steppe also likely invented the wheel,
allowing them to transport bigger loads as well
as their families, the elderly, and children too
young to ride. Whole communities could now become
completely mobile, living their lives from birth
to death without ever settling in one place.
This alternative way of life would meet with
remarkable success. One legacy of that success
is the language that many of us speak today.
Beginning perhaps around 4,000 BC, an enigmatic
population known only as the Proto-Indo Europeans
rode out of the Western portion of the steppe
in all directions. They brought their horses,
their wagons, and chariots with them. Wherever
they went, from India to Persia, Greece and
Northern Europe, they conquered or settled and
left their language behind. Their lost dialect
is the ancestor of 445 languages that survive to
this day, from Hindi, Sinhala, Punjabi, and Farsi, to
Russian, Spanish, French, German, and English, and
in all of these languages they left traces of
their way of life. Many languages in the Indo-
European family use similar words derived from
Proto-Indo European for objects like wheel, axel, wagon,
chariot, and of course, horse. It's believed the
Proto-Indo Europeans had two words for horses,
which have been reconstructed to something like
‘ekwos’ and ‘marcos’, possibly to differentiate
between a wild horse and a tamed horse.
Ekwos entered Latin as ‘equus’, from which we get
equestrian, and it entered Ancient Greek as ‘hippos’,
from which we get hippodrome and hippopotamus,
and the word ‘marcos’ has survived in English as
the word for a female horse, a mare. This English
word can be found echoing on the other side of the
world in Mongolia, where a single horse is called
‘mor’, and even in the non-Indo-European language of
Mandarin Chinese, where a horse is called ‘ma’. Today,
these words connect people on every side of the
globe, and nearly half of the world's population
speaks a language descended from the Indo-European
family. The Proto-Indo Europeans were the first
nomads to ride out of the steppe and leave
their mark on history, but they were far from
the last. Still, there were drawbacks to the
nomadic lifestyle. While the settled peoples
of the world developed alphabets and writing
systems that allowed them to keep records
and recount their histories, the peoples
of the steppe did not develop their own system
of writing. For this reason, for much of their
history we can only detect their presence
through the writings of others, who often
feared and hated them. In the 5th century BC,
the Greek historian Herodotus would write
one account of the horse-riding nomads who
lived in the steppe around the Black Sea, and
increasingly made armed raids into Central
Europe, a people the Greeks called the Scythians.
Rather than build cities or walls, they
all carry their homes around with them
on wagons, practice their archery from
horseback, and depend for their living
on cattle rather than the fruits of the plow.
How, then, could they fail to defy every effort
made to conquer them or to pin them down?
Already the settled peoples of the world
were encountering a paradox, that despite
all the technological advancement that
agricultural society had brought, these steppe
peoples were still exceptionally difficult to
fight. More than 800 years later, the
struggling Roman Empire was limping
through the remains of the 4th century, rocked
by crisis and civil war. It was at this point
that they were menaced by a new threat,
a nomadic people who rode out of the
steppe and sent waves of refugees fleeing in
their wake. They would be known as the Huns.
The Roman writer Ammianus Marcellinus wrote with
distaste about these frighteningly ruthless
nomads. The Huns are a race savage beyond
all parallel. They grow up without beards,
with closely-knit and strong limbs. They are
all without fixed abode or settled mode of
life. None of their offspring, when asked,
can tell you where he comes from, since
he was conceived in one place, born far
from there, and brought up still farther
away. The arrival of the Huns was a major factor
that contributed to the collapse of the Western
Roman Empire. In the decades that followed,
under the rule of their leader Atilla, the
Huns would remake the balance of power in Europe.
They fleetingly captured large areas up to the
banks of the Rhine, and left fire and destruction in
their wake. Part of the reason for the Huns’ success
was their innovative use of the technological
development of the composite bow. Bows made of a
single piece of wood had a natural limit to their
power, but on the steppe, a good bow could mean the
difference between life and death, and so, people
had poured immense energy into developing them. By
the time of the Huns, these were already intricate
constructions, combining multiple materials; a
core of maple wood, bone, and antelope horn, knotted
with sinew, deer gut, and leather, all held together
with a fish-based glue. The combination of these
materials created a bow with immense elasticity,
capable of hurtling an arrow at tremendous speeds
and over great distances, reportedly as far as 300
meters. If these accounts are accurate, then these bows
could shoot further than an English longbow, which
stood taller than a man, but crucially was
compact enough to be drawn from horseback.
The combination of horse and composite bow would
make the steppe horse archer the deadliest single
entity on the planet, and in Europe, these
weapons would come to be known with fear
and reverence as Hun bows. The people
of China struggled no less with their nomadic
neighbors. During the period of the Han
Dynasty, a people they knew as the Xiongnu
constantly menaced their borders for much of
the first millennium, and may even have been the
same people as the European Huns. One Han period
Chinese writer, Sima Qian, describes their way of
life. The Xiongnu are mountain barbarians. They
move in search of water and pasture, and have no
walled cities or fixed dwellings, nor do they
engage in any kind of agriculture. They wear
clothes of hide or wraps made of fur or felt.
They have no writing, and even their promises
and agreements are only verbal. The little boys
start out by learning to ride sheep, and shoot
birds and rats with a bow. Thus, all the young
men are able to act as armed cavalry in time
of war. Around the 4th century, these
peoples also introduced the stirrup, straps for the
rider's feet that help them stay in the saddle
and allow them even greater control of their
horses. One medieval Chinese writer describes
the sight of a steppe horse warrior in action.
When they ride at a gallop, they always stand
in the stirrups rather than sit in the saddle.
They are swift as the onrush of a gale
and strong as the weight of a mountain.
Wheeling left and cutting right like wings in
flight, they shoot with power enough to pierce
armor. For the civilizations that lived on the
borders of the steppe in China, India, Persia, the
Middle East, and Eastern Europe, these nomadic
peoples could be alien, frightening, and primitive.
While they were divided, they could be contained,
controlled, and violently put down, but every few
hundred years, they would unite into a force
large enough to flood out of the steppe. They
would come to conquer and settle, to wreak havoc
and sow destruction, but every time, to change
the course of history. The most dramatic of these
stories would take place as the 12th century came
to a close, and the memory of Atilla's Huns
had faded to just another ghost story from
classical history. It would come in the form of
a people who were perhaps the most unlikely of
conquerers. When our story starts, they had many
names, but soon they would become known as the
Mongols. To find the location of the beginning
of this story, we must travel to the east, along
the wide expanse of the Eurasian steppe. For
thousands of kilometers, we would see only
grassland and seasonal deserts. Then we pass
over the Altai Mountains, home to wolves, curly-
horned ibex, and eagles. Finally we would reach
the far eastern steppe on a high plateau of what
is today Mongolia. At the end of the 12th century,
the Mongols were just one of countless groups that
existed in this land, speaking Turkic languages
like Uighur and dialects of Mongolia, and worshiping
any number of gods. But despite this variation,
many of them followed a similar way of
life. Life on the steppe meant following
the natural cycles of the world. In the
warm summers, the rains come, and the
grassland flushes green. During these
months, the nomads’ herds of cattle, goats,
sheep, camels, and horses have plenty to eat,
and they graze in their summer pastures on the
open grassland. But as the cold, dry winters descend,
herders would move to their winter pastures
in the north, where the green valleys at the
foot of the mountains remain shaded, and there
are still grasses growing. This natural cycle
dictated every aspect of steppe life, as one
medieval Chinese writer, Zhao Gong, describes.
In their custom, each time the grass grows green
is one year. So, if someone asks one of them his
age, he says how many times the grass has greened.
Also, once when I asked one of them what month and
day he was born, he laughed and replied, I can't
remember, nor did I ever know it in the first
place. Winter on the steppe is harsh. During
these months, the wind blows straight from
Siberia, and a layer of ice can often cover
the grasslands completely. When the grass is
frozen, steppe peoples would allow their horses to
graze ahead of the other animals. They would use
their hooves to crack the ice, and then
other livestock like sheep could follow.
In the flat, featureless landscape, people navigated
primarily using rivers, which interlace the steppe in
countless waterways; among them the Orkhon, the
Selenge, and the Onon. By riding up and down
these rivers, the steppe peoples could find their
way, and would never be far from water for their
horses. The knowledge of these river paths were
passed on from person to person by word of mouth,
through poems and songs. The primary mode
of shelter in the steppe was the tent. One Chinese
writer of the time named Li Xinchuan describes
these habitations. They have neither walls nor
moats, nor houses nor mansions, but instead make
felt tents for which they choose dwelling places
that have the most beneficial water and
grass. In English, these tents are often called
yurts, derived from a Turkic word, but in Mongolian
they are known as ‘ger’. Their structures are made
of lattice of light but strong willow wands,
and their walls are made of felt, a material
created by pressing together layer upon layer of
sheep’s wool. These tents are warm during winter
and cool during summer, and they are also
fully mobile, designed to be dismantled and
rebuilt every day if necessary, and carried from
place to place on the back of carts. The Chinese
observer Peng Daya wrote the following description
of seeing steppe people moving across the landscape.
The yurts, that is felt tents in which they live,
have neither walls nor roof beams. They move them
to follow the grass and water, never staying
for long. Cattle, horses, or camels are used to
pull their carts, on which it is roomy enough
to sit or recline. These carts are dispatched
in groups of five, looking like columns of
ants as they wind along, extending out for five
miles. Some of these carts could be huge, designed
to carry the tents of nobles on their back. One
European visitor to Mongolia in the Middle Ages,
William of Rubruck, described seeing carts as large
as 10 meters wide, about the length of a London bus.
These dwellings are constructed of such a size
as to be on occasions 30 feet across. I myself once
measured a breadth of 20 feet between the wheel
tracks of a wagon, and when the dwelling was on the
wagon, it protruded beyond the wheels by at least 5
feet on either side. The wagon's axle was as large
as a ship's mast. I have counted 22 oxen to one
wagon. These carts were insulated from the
changeable weather of the steppe, and those
used to transport valuables were protected by
a special kind of felt that had been soaked
in waxy tallow to keep out the rain. When their
day’s traveling was done, the steppe peoples would
fortify their camp by placing their carts
in a ring, making a makeshift wall to keep
out raiders and thieves. Their ger tents were
always erected facing south so that the sun
would shine in through the doorway. The heads
of the house and people of high status would
always sit on the north side of the tent
facing the door, while more junior members
of the clan would sit in the south. In the center
of the ger was a hearth fire made from burning
pieces of dried dung. This was a resource in
infinite abundance among herders, but usually
goat dung was preferred, since it burned cleanly
and gave off a pleasant smell like burning leaves.
Above this fire there was a smoke hole cut in
the felt roof. These smoke holes had a practical
purpose as a chimney, but they also held a
kind of spiritual significance. The fire and
the hole in the tent were considered to be a
means to communicate with the clan's ancestors,
and was a ceremonial space for rituals. We can
imagine a Mongol family sitting around this
fire with the vast darkness of the steppe at night
outside, watching the sparks of their fire drift
out through the hole in the roof, as the howling
steppe wind outside batters the felt walls of the
tent. For those nomads who lived on the open grass-
lands of the steppe, life was good. Their vast herds
turned the virtually infinite supply of grass
into ample meat and milk, from which they could
make a variety of cheese, yogurts, and other dairy
products, and into dung that could be burned in
their fires. The steppe gave them everything they
needed to survive, and for everything else, they
could trade with the lands of China to the south.
Nomadic peoples would buy silk, fine silver items,
and carved furniture, along with all the comforts
of sophisticated society, and in return they would
trade northern goods like furs, of which the most
valued was the delicate dark pelt of the sable, a
kind of small pine marten, along with leather, bone,
and antler for carving, herd animals like cattle
and sheep, and majestic tame hunting birds like the
golden eagle, taken from the forest as fledglings
and trained to hunt small game. But above all, they
traded the thing that settled societies needed
most and nomads had in enormous supply; horses. As
a result, these clans in the south of the Mongolian
steppe, like the Tartars and the Kereyit, were richer and
lived more comfortable lives, and they defended
their enviable positions with extreme ferocity.
In contrast, for much of their history, the Mongols
were among the losers of the steppe world. While
other nomads thrived on the southern grasslands,
the Mongols subsisted in the harsh north, on the
edge of the mountains and the endless Siberian
forests, home to wolves, bears, and wild forest
peoples like the Merkit. Here, the grasses were
meager and couldn't support large herds. As a
result, the Mongols supplemented their diets
by hunting deer and small mammals like marmots,
gathering pine nuts in the forests, and fishing in
the rivers. The medieval Persian historian, Ata-Malik
Juvaini, writes about the sorry state of this people.
They had no chief or ruler. Each tribe lived
separately. They were not united with one
another, and there was constant fighting and
hostility between them. Their clothing was of
the skins of dogs and mice, and their food
was the flesh of those animals and other
dead things. Their wine was mares’ milk, and their
dessert the fruit of a tree shaped like a pine.
The sign of a great king amongst them was that
his stirrups were made of iron. From that, one can
form a picture of their other luxuries. Part of
the reason for their poor situation was that the
Mongols were among the most divided peoples of
the steppe, constantly fighting amongst themselves.
Other steppe peoples had long ago formed large
confederations and adapted to the cultures of
more settled societies around them, even taking on
their religions. Some, like the Khitan, had adopted
Buddhism, while others had converted to Islam,
which had arrived in the southern steppe some
centuries before, usually with traders passing
through. Others still like the Kereyit and the Naiman
had even converted to the cult of a powerful
shaman from a far-away land, who was rumored
to have risen from the dead, a man named Jesus
Christ. Word of his teachings had been brought
to Mongolia by Assyrian Nestorian missionaries
around the 11th century, and had appealed to many
people there, since the name Jesus reminded them
of the word ‘yesu’, which in Mongolian means the
number nine, a number considered to be sacred and
to bring good luck. But the Mongols on the edge of
the Siberian forests had adopted no such beliefs.
They maintained the ancient beliefs of their
ancestors, worshiping the Earth mother goddess
and their ancient god of the Great Blue Sky, who
they named Tengri. The 11th-century Muslim scholar
Mahmud al-Kashgari describes the worship of this
god. Tengri means God. The infidel nomads
call heaven Tengri, and likewise everything
natural that impresses them; for example, a
high mountain or a large tree. They worship
such things, and they call a wise man Tengri-
kaan. The god Tengri was believed to
reside particularly in the region of
a vast freshwater lake known as Lake Baikal, and
it's here that the mythology of the Mongols
begins. In the Mongol conception of
their own history, their story began
when a Siberian wolf mated with a roe deer, and gave
birth to the first of their royal line. This
founding myth is recounted in the enigmatic
document known as The Secret History of the
Mongols.
There was a blue-gray wolf born with a destiny
from heaven above. His wife was a beautiful red
fallow doe. They came crossing the sea. They
made their home at the headwaters of the Onon
River. With a surface area of more than 30,000
square kilometers, Lake Baikal is slightly larger than
the country of Belgium, and is the largest
freshwater lake in Eurasia, and sitting as
it does on a tectonic rift, it is also by far
the deepest on the planet, plunging to a depth
of more than 1,600 meters. As a result, it is also the
world's largest lake in volume, containing more
than all the American Great Lakes combined. In fact,
this one lake is estimated to contain somewhere
between a quarter to a fifth of all the surface
fresh water on planet Earth. For most people
of the steppe, this was the largest body of water
they would ever see, and on account of this, the
Mongols would often simply refer to it as ‘the sea’.
When winter comes to the Siberian wastes, Lake Baikal
freezes solid, with ice many meters thick, and
the snows blow in chaotic patterns over its
surface. According to the story, eleven generations
after this unnatural coupling of wolf and deer
on the shore of Lake Baikal, a woman known as
Alan Gua or Alan the Beautiful would give
birth to five sons, and from these five men
were supposed to have descended the royal
lineage of the Mongols. One day, the legend says,
Alan the Beautiful found her five sons arguing
with one another. She gathered them together
and taught them a lesson that has passed into
legend. She gave them each an arrow shaft, and
told them to break it. Each one was broken and
let fall. Then she took five arrow shafts bundled
together, gave the shafts to them, and told them to
break them. All five of them, one after another,
took the five arrow shafts joined together, but
were unable to do as she said and break it.
Then their mother Alan the Beautiful spoke
words of admonition to her five sons. You, my five
sons, were born from a single womb. You are just
like the five arrow shafts; if you are alone,
one by one, you will be easily broken by
anyone, but if you are joined in accord
as one, then how could you be broken by
anyone? This story was told to generations of
Mongol children, and it contained a powerful
truth about life on the steppe. Out there,
family was the most powerful connection
that anyone had, and without it,
you were left alone, hungry, and
defenseless. Mongols thought of their kin
relationships as a kind of branching tree
or river. They traced their ancestry back to real
ancestors, a relationship known as Uruk, but the
Mongol elite also held to a kind of mythical
kinship, in which every person was descended from
one or other semi-mythical character who lived
in the vague and distant past, often one of the
sons of Alan the Beautiful. In this way, Mongols
considered themselves to belong to a wider clan
group that often had little to do with their
actual heritage. These they called their oboq.
Accompanied with these two systems of relationship
was a third, one that people could freely choose
to enter into. This was known as anda, a kind of
blood brother. In this ritual, two close friends
could swear an eternal allegiance, essentially
becoming family, and this relationship was taken
just as seriously as any connection of kinship. One
Mongol text of the time records the depth of this
bond. If we listen to the words of
the elders and the ancients, this is
the way in which anda love each other.
People who are anda are as if they have
one life without any separation, and
are lifelong saviors to each other.
To survive in the harsh world of the steppe,
people had to be tough, but they also had to
come together. To get a sense of the reality of
this life, there is no better example than the
upbringing of one man born here on the steppe,
whose story we know in unprecedented detail,
a man who would rise from the humblest
beginnings imaginable to change the course
of world history. His name was Temujin, but that
is not the name that history would know him by.
It's worth mentioning that all of the story you
are about to hear was very nearly lost to history,
but in 1866, a Russian monk working in the archives
of China uncovered a remarkable manuscript. It was
a Chinese copy of a copy of a copy of a lost
Mongolian document written by an unknown author
sometime in the 13th century. This book used
Chinese characters to recreate the phonetic
sounds of the Mongolian language, and was used as a
kind of textbook to help Chinese scholars who were
learning Mongolian. For this reason, its characters
appeared to be nonsense in Chinese, and so, it was
lost among the archives. But once its contents
were deciphered, it transformed our understanding
of this period. It was a document written only for
the eyes of the Mongolian royal family, telling in
unprecedented detail the ups and downs of their
story, and for this reason, it came to be known
as The Secret History of the Mongols. It's the
first and most important source ever written in
the Mongolian language, and it blends narrative
history with flourishes of vaulting epic poetry.
The story of the man named Temujin
begins in the second half of the
12th century with his mother, a young woman named
Oelun. She was from the Eastern Mongolian steppe,
to the southeast of Lake Baikal, and was probably
no more than a teenager. She had just married a
man named Chiledu of the Merkit people. This young
couple was in love, and she was now traveling
back to his homeland with him to live with his
family in their camp, but things would not go
according to the young lovers’ plan. On their
fateful journey home, they passed through the
lands of a warrior named Yesugei, the leader of a
small Mongol band on the great Onon River. Yesugei
had once been a powerful leader, but had recently
fallen on tough times. That day, he was out hunting
with his hawk when he saw the marriage procession
pass by, and caught sight of the beautiful face
of Oelun. Yesugei already had a wife, but upon seeing
Oelun, he became overcome with desire for her, and
as a Mongol warrior, he was used to taking what he
desired. He rode back to his camp and gathered his
two brothers, and together they chased after the
wedding party with murder in their hearts. When
Oelun and her husband saw the warrior brothers
bearing down on them, she begged her husband to
flee and save his life, as The Secret History
recalls. His bride, Madame Oelun, said to him, “You;
have you understood what those three men are
about? Their looks say they want your life. As
long as you have your life, at least, you will
find a woman to wed. Save your life.”
Chiledu listened to her pleas and fled across
the grasslands, leaving Oelun to be captured. The
two of them would never see each other again.
The three riders chased him from behind
over seven ridges until they drove him
off. They came back, and Yesugei took Madame
Oelun by the tether, and she wailed in a
great voice. She wailed until the Onon River
echoed it and the wooded valley rang with it.
We don't know what happened to Oelun's husband,
Chiledu, but it seems he never made any attempt
to recapture her. In the harsh world of the
steppe, a man only had rights to what he could
defend, and Oelun was now no longer considered
his wife. As for Oelun, her heartbreak must have
been overwhelming, but she seems to have
accepted her fate and settled into the
new life that Yesugei had forced upon her at the
edge of the mountains and the great Siberian
forest. Here, she would have to be tough to survive.
Yesugei already had a wife, and by then, this woman
had borne him a son named Begter. Soon, Oelun too
became pregnant, and gave Yesugei their first
child together. This child was a boy, and it said
that when he came screaming into the world, he
was clutching a tiny but fearsome omen in his
little hand. When Madame Oelun was big
with child, just then, when they were at Deli-un
Boldak on the Onon River, he was born. When
he was born, he was born clutching a clot of
blood in his right hand, the size of a knuckle
bone. To the Mongols, this was
an unmistakable sign that the boy would
grow up to be a warrior. The year was around
1162; in the Chinese calendar, the Year of the
Horse. At the time, the Mongols were at war with
another much more powerful steppe people, the
Tartars, who lived closer to the border with
Northern China. Yesugei had recently captured a
Tatar warrior named Temujin Uge in battle, and in
celebration of this feat, he decided to name the
new baby boy after his captured enemy. The name
Temujin likely meant blacksmith or iron worker, but
in time it would come to gain a different
association; the iron one, or the man of iron.
This captured man may even have been executed
at the naming ceremony, and his strength ritually
given to the new baby boy. From this bloody
beginning, Temujin's childhood was a tough one,
but it forged him into the man he would become.
Living at Yesugei's camp on the banks of the Onon
River, he would have learned to hunt and fish, and
of course, how to ride a horse from a young age. One
Chinese writer describes the life of a steppe child.
Even three-year-old toddlers are secured to the
saddle with rope, and given something to grasp
with their hands so they can follow along as
the rest dash about on horseback. In their fourth
and fifth years, they carry under one arm a small
bow and short arrows, and when grown, they occupy
themselves during all four seasons with hunting
game. Hunting on the steppe was done using a
system known as the nerge or noose, and these
grand hunts would take place every year and
involve large numbers of different families
and kin groups. Every Mongol learned from a
young age how to work together with other
riders across a vast distance, encircling a
huge area of land, and driving all the wild
animals within it into the center of their ring.
Then the noose tightened. They would drive the
animals closer and closer together until there
was nowhere left to run. Then they would begin to
fire hundreds of arrows into the mass of terrified
prey. Yesugei would have taught his young sons this
skill from a young age, but Temujin's relationship
with his kidnapper of a father may have been
a strained one. Yesugei already had an oldest son
by another woman, the boy named Begter, and Begter seems
to have enjoyed reminding Temujin of his place.
When Temujin was nine years old, his father clearly
worried about the divisions in his family. He
decided to take the young boy to find a wife
of his own. They traveled out together and
met with the ruler of a nearby clan, who was
also something of a shaman. He told Yesugei that the
boy who rode beside him was destined for great
things. This boy of yours is a boy with
flame in his eyes and fire in his face.
Last night I dreamt a dream; a white falcon
flew towards me clutching the sun and the moon,
and alighted on my hand. This dream of mine was
showing me that you would come leading this boy of
yours. The chief gave the young boy the
hand of one of his daughters, a girl named
Borte. She was a year older than him, and at
the first sight of her, Temujin fell in love,
a love that would never leave him. On his way home,
his father Yesugei must have been satisfied. He had
found a good wife for his young son, and could now
head home to a family made at peace. But fate would
conspire against him. That night, he stopped at a
camp belonging to some Tartar men. By this time, the
Tartars and the Mongols were no longer at war, but
they were still bitter rivals. The customs on the
steppe stated that whenever someone stopped at your
camp, you were required to set your differences
aside and offer them hospitality, but these
Tartars had other ideas, as The Secret History
accounts. Remembering their early grudge, they
plotted murder and mixed in poison for him.
Feeling sick on the way, he went for three
days and arrived at his ger, and felt worse.
Yesugei said, “My insides feel sick. I fell victim to a
plot, and now I feel sick inside.” Having spoken, he
died. Hearing of this treachery from a
rider sent by his dying father, Temujin rode hard
across the steppe, heading home to be with
his mother, and left his betrothed, Borte,
behind. The death of Yesugei left this vulnerable
family exposed and alone in the cruel world of
steppe politics. Yesugei's clan had been a mixture
of different peoples, including families of
Mongols known as the Borjigin and Tayichyut, and
they had little holding them together other than
Yesugei's leadership. Now they split into separate
parts and departed in all directions, and none
of them had any room for a widowed woman and
her hungry children. They left Oelun and her
children behind, alone, destitute, and starving on
the banks of the Onon River, as The Secret History
records. The Tayichyut brethren moved camp
down along the Onon River to leave behind
on the range Madame Oelun the widow, the
little ones and boys, the mothers and
children. The Tayichyut took their livestock, their goats
and their sheep, and left them with only the few
horses they owned. This was practically a death
sentence. When winter came to the steppe, this
feeble group would no doubt freeze and run out
of food. But remarkably, that's not what happened.
That's because Oelun refused to let her children
starve. Madame Oelun, born both womanly and
wise, finding food for her small boys, fixing up her
flowing skirts, flying up and down the Onon River's
flood, finding wild fruits, crab apples, and cherries,
filled she the night and day their famished
throats. They were well raised on wild garlic
and onion, lily bulbs, leeks, and onion
leaves. At night, while they ate these meager foods,
she told them the stories of her ancestors, the
stories that had been passed down to her
from her parents, the stories of Alan
the Beautiful and her five unruly sons, and the
parable of the five arrows that could not be
broken so long as they stayed together. At first,
the boys seem to have taken these lessons to
heart. Saying to each other, we must feed our mother,
they sat on Mother Onon's muddy banks and mastered
metal hooks and lures, catching maimed and motley fish.
Turning needles into hooks, they hooked trout and
little white fish. They sifted pools for silver
minnows, and so they served back their mother's
love. It was around this time that Temujin
met another boy of the same age, whose family
would often camp near to their own settlement.
This boy's name was Jamuka. The two boys hunted
and fished together, and became good friends.
In fact, they became so close that they swore
to enter into that bond of chosen kinship, and
became what the Mongols called anda, a kind of
blood brother. They most likely spilled a drop
of their blood into a cup of fermented mare's
milk and both drank from it, swearing an oath
of eternal brotherhood, and always to fight on
one another's behalf. It must have been hard
to imagine at the time watching these two
skinny boys playing in the hills or at games of
knucklebones beside the great river, but one day
they would fight one another in a bitter civil
war over who would rule all the people of the
Mongols. Soon, winter came to the
steppe. Snow fell, and the Onon River
froze solid. The now reduced family
must have come close to death, but
finally spring arrived on the steppe,
and the ice on the grasslands thawed.
But by this time, all was not well among this
lonely family. Despite their mother's stories
warning them to stay united, a bitter rivalry
had always existed between Temujin and Yesugei's
oldest son Begter, who had been born of another
mother. This rivalry would only grow bitterer
as their situation worsened and hunger set
in. As the older and larger boy, Begter often
took for himself the best of the fish and
birds that they caught, until eventually
Temujin had had enough. He and his younger
brother Qasar soon plotted to kill their
older brother. It wasn't just Begter's selfishness
that motivated this decision. With their father
dead, their mother Oelun was an unmarried woman. As
a result, she was considered available for marriage,
and though it might seem strange to us, the most
likely candidate may have been her young stepson,
Begter. Traveling to Mongolia a century later,
the Venetian explorer Marco Polo noted this
peculiarity of Mongol marriage laws. The marriage
customs of Tartars are as follows; any man may take
a hundred wives if he so please and if he be able
to keep them. But the first wife is ever held most
in honor and as the most legitimate. They may marry
their cousins, and if a father dies, his son may
take any of the wives, his mother always excepted.
That is to say, the eldest son may do this, but
no other. If Begter married Oelun, he would
secure his position as the undisputed head
of the family. Temujin and Qasar were determined
not to let that happen. The pair of them chose
their moment carefully. They took their bows
and crept up on Begter while he sat on the hill,
drawing their bowstrings taught. When he saw
them, he briefly pleaded for his his life, but
they didn't listen. Temujin and Qasar shot him
with their arrows, and left his body to lie in
the long grass of the steppe. When they returned to
their tent, their mother saw the murder in their
eyes. When they came back into the ger, the
Madame Mother understood it all from
the faces of her two children. “Murderers!” She
shouted. “When bursting out from my hot womb, he
wielded in his hand a black blood clot.
Like a hound that devours its own, like
a panther that pounces against a cliff, like a
lion that cannot restrain its wrath, like
a wolf that stalks in the whirling
blizzard, you killed your own brother.”
When summer came again that year, their
old tribe, the Tayichyut, returned, following their
seasonal route as always. They must have
expected to find nothing but a collection
of whitened bones littering the steppe, where
they had left the family of Oelun and her
children to die, but they were astonished and
a little concerned to find these young men
and their mother still living by the side of
the river. Somehow, they had clung to life. This
could turn out to be a problem for the Tayichyut.
These boys were becoming stronger each year,
and maybe one day they would be strong enough
to take revenge for abandoning them. Perhaps
when the Tayichyut heard of Temujin's killing of Begter,
they used this as an excuse to hunt him down as
an outlaw. Temujin ran, and they chased him high up
into the mountains. Fleeing for his life, he made
for one peak in particular that held a great
significance, the sacred mountain named Burkan
Khaldun. Among the rocky slopes strewn with scree,
there grow forests of Siberian larch and pine,
where it was possible for him to hide. For
a while, he evaded them among the forest's
shady depths, but the Tayichyut posted guards in a
wide circle and slowly closed the net around
him. Eventually they cornered him and dragged
him back to their camp as a prisoner.
At first, the Tayichyut planned to execute Temujin, but
but they soon changed their minds. A young, strong
boy like him would make a good worker, and so, they
brought the young man back to live as a slave in
their camp. To humiliate him, they forced him to
wear a heavy wooden board around his neck. This
prevented him from eating or sleeping comfortably,
and made his status as a slave known to everyone.
It's not known how long he was held captive here,
but all that time, Temujin must have been thinking of
his bride, Borte, and dreaming that they would one
day be reunited. Eventually he saw his chance to
escape. One night, the Tayichyut feasted on the red disk
day, the 16th of the first moon of summer, on the
banks of the Onon as the sun went down. A feeble youth
brought him to that feast. As the fellows at the
feast were being sent away, he grabbed the wooden
board away from the feeble boy, struck him on the
head once with it, and ran. He lay down on his
back on the river's edge, the moonlight bright as
day. With the Tayichyut guards combing the steppe
for him, Temujin saw only one chance to escape.
He leapt into the icy river, and the heavy
wooden board acted as a flotation device.
When he climbed out of the water some way
downstream, he found a family of herdsmen
who helped him to remove the lock on the heavy
piece of wood, and he limped back home to his
family. Oelun and his siblings must have been
overjoyed to see him when he returned, but
he had other things on his mind. The first
thing he did when he returned was to ride
out to claim his bride, Borte. He must have
feared the worst, that her father had gone
back on his word and given her to someone else,
but perhaps the old shaman had remembered his
vision and the fire he had seen in the eyes of
that young boy. All those years, he had kept his
daughter for the man she was promised to. She
and Temujin were married. They had a daughter
and lived together happily on the banks
of the Onon River, and that is where the
story of Temujin might have ended; with a happy
family, with children and grandchildren, with
a quiet death in a ger tent in the middle
of the steppe, and we would never know his name.
But history had other plans, and the steppe was no
place for a quiet life. One day, a raiding party of
the northern forest people known as the Merkit
swept down on their camp while Temujin was out
hunting. This raid was a perfect example of the
tangled world of steppe rivalries and blood feuds,
for in fact, these men were the brothers of
Chiledu, the man that Temujin's mother Oelun had
once married, and who had lost his wife to
Yesugei. With Yesugei dead, these brothers of Chiledu
were taking their revenge on the man's son,
instead. They burned his tents and took away
his animals and what possessions he had,
and just as Yesugei had once stolen Oelun,
these Merkit raiders now stole his wife,
Borte, away, and retreated with her back
to the cover of the Siberian forests. With his
small band, Temujin had little hope of reclaiming
her. But he did have one chance; that
was to reach out to the man who had
once been his childhood friend on
the banks of the Onon River, a man
who was now a rising warrior in the nearby
clan of the Kereyid, his anda blood brother,
Jamuka. When Jamuka saw his old friend
after so many years, he was overjoyed, but
he must have seen the pain in Temujin's
face, and when Temujin told him what had
happened, Jamuka flew into a rage. The Secret
History records him giving the following
promise.
A black leather war drum with its
booming bellow I have beaten. A steed with
swift steps have I saddled. A steel shirt
have I worn. A solid spear have I seized. A
stinging arrow on my string have I strung.
To slaughter all the savage Merkit, I set out.
The lord that Jamuka served was a man named
Toghril Khan, the Khan of the Kereyid people, and he
agreed to help Temujin get his wife back. They
spent that year building an army, and set out
in the autumn with a host over 30,000 strong,
riding north into the hostile forests where the
Merkit lived. They waited until nightfall, and
then, under cover of darkness, they swept down
on the Merkit camp in a surprise attack.
The Secret History records what happens
next. They swarmed in to seize his girls in
a sudden swoop. They plundered his kingdom
mercilessly…as the Merkit folk fled down the
Selenge River in the night, as our soldiers
dogged the heels of the fugitive Merit through
the night, plundering and looting, and as Temujin
called out, “Borta! Borta!”, they met. Madame
Borta was there among the fugitives. She
recognized Temujin's voice, got down from the wagon,
and ran towards him, and they hugged each other in
welcome.
There was only one complication; Temujin soon
found out that his wife Borte had become pregnant.
Since she had been captured and forcibly married
to a Merkit lord, Temujin could never know whether
the child was his. Perhaps for this reason, when his
firstborn son came into the world, Temujin gave
him the name Jochi, which in Mongolian means guest,
perhaps alluding to the question of his fatherhood.
But they all agreed to put the issue behind them,
and Temujin accepted Jochi the guest as his eldest
son. After this experience, it was now clear to
Temujin that a life of peace was impossible on
the steppe. For protection, he and his family joined
Jamuka's camp, and the pair of anda blood brothers
rode together as equals for a year and a half.
They hunted and fought together, and perhaps
even played knucklebones together the way they
had as boys. Jamuka also introduced Temujin to his
lord and patron, the ruler of the Kereyid clan, the
man named Toghril Khan. This time would have been crucial
for Temujin. During his upbringing, he had known only
hardship and poverty, whereas Jamuka had become an
experienced warrior and leader. He must have taught
Temujin all he knew. For a while, everything seemed
to be going well, but eventually Temujin began to
detect a hint of resentment from his blood brother,
perhaps even a glimmer of contempt. One day,
Jamuka ordered him to stay home and protect the
clan's sheep herds, a clear sign that things were
beginning to sour between these old friends. The
two quarreled, and Temujin's wife Borte advised
him to leave his friend and start out on his own.
Madame Borta said, “Jamuka Anda is said
to be a person who easily gets
tired of things. Now the time has
come that he has become tired of
us. Let us not pitch camp. Let us make a
clean break and move away through the
night.” With a heavy heart, Temujin agreed, and he
and his family prepared to leave. He would now
be starting again from the beginning, alone on
the steppe. He expected to leave with just his
wife and his small children, but to his surprise,
he had gained a great deal of popularity among
Jamuka's people. In fact, when Temujin made to
leave Jamuka's camp, half of his blood brother’s
followers asked to go with him. The loyalty that
Temujin clearly inspired was partly due to his
reputation for generosity. When dividing up the
loot from a successful raid, steppe peoples had
for thousands of years adhered to an ancient
system by which the elites and nobles took
all the best plunder for themselves, and then
divided the rest among the other men as they
saw fit. Common people were usually left out of this
system. In the harsh world of the steppe, strength
was everything, and the strong took the lion's
share. But Temujin appears to have been different.
He had grown up on the freezing bank of the Onon
River with his siblings, and learned to share
everything in common. He had once killed his older
brother Begter partly for taking the best food for
himself, and since then must have harbored a
distaste for this ancient system, and perhaps he
had learned that inspiring loyalty in those around
him was worth any amount of gold or any number of
horses. As a result, he pioneered a new and
somewhat radical system in the world of
the steppe. In his party, loot would be shared
according to merit, and those who did well in
battle were given a greater share, even
if they were just common people. Among
his followers, he also at times introduced a
kind of insurance policy, decreeing that any
soldier who was killed in battle would have
their share of the loot given to their widow
and orphaned children, a policy perhaps inspired
by his own experience of losing his father and
being plunged into poverty as a child. A certain
amount of loot was also distributed to the elderly
and disabled. All of this meant that when he left
Jamuka's camp, a number of men wanted to follow him,
but in taking half of his blood brother’s
people, Temujin had also gained a powerful
enemy. Throughout this time, the Mongols
were still a fractured and divided people,
but now these two rival warriors both
desired to make themselves ruler over
all the Mongols, a title that had long been
known as Khan. In the summer of 1189, Temujin
decided to take his chance. He summoned a
meeting of the clans known as a kuriltai.
A kuriltai was a riotous event, part political
rally and part festival. This one took place on the
shores of a place on the steppe known as the Blue
Lake. Here, the air would be filled with the sound
of horses, laughter, and perhaps the mesmerizing
sound of Mongolian throat singing, a unique vocal
form in which the singers summon sound from deep
in their larynx with such precision that they
are able to sing two notes at once. The kuriltai
would have included games and feasts, the so-called
three manly pursuits of horse races, wrestling, and
archery tournaments, and of course, the consumption
of vast quantities of alcohol. It's likely
the attendants would have drunk airag or kumis,
the alcoholic drink made from fermented
mare's milk. One Chinese diplomat named Zhao
Gong, who attended a Mongol feast in the early
1220s, even records a kind of Mongol drinking
game. They do not end their banqueting until
everyone is roaring drunk. Every time they drink
wine, it is their custom that those who sit next to
each other should, after tasting, exchange cups. If
one's counterpart holds the cup with one hand, it
means that I must taste a mouthful, and only then
will he dare to drink. If he holds the cup in both
hands, then he wishes to switch cups with me. Then I
have to drink his wine to the bottom and pour wine
to toast him. This made it very easy to get drunk.
Whenever they see a foreign guest talk uproariously,
make noise, and act rudely in a drunken state, or else
vomit or fall asleep, then they are very happy and
say, “The guest gets drunk, so his heart is one with
ours!” But despite the revelry, the kuriltai
had a very serious purpose. By holding this
gathering of the clans, Temujin was declaring
his intention to become Khan of the Mongols.
This was not a particularly prestigious title.
The Mongols were a weak and divided people, and
any Khan who led them would still pay tribute
to the much more powerful Toghril Khan of the
Kereyeits. But it was still a clear declaration of
war against the more likely claimant to the
title and the man who commanded the support of
most Mongol nobles, his own blood brother, Jamuka.
When Jamuka heard news about this kuriltai,
he must have been enraged. Clashes between
the two men's followers intensified until one
day, one of Jamuka's relatives was killed in
a castle raid. This was the excuse he
was looking for, to finally go to war
and crush his blood brother Temujin.
The two sides gathered their forces.
Temujin would finally meet his blood brother in
battle at a place called Dalan-baljut. The Mongol
horsemen would have wheeled around each other in
great thundering packs, hailing one another with
arrows before closing in and clashing with their
long lances. We can imagine the thundering of the
hooves, the cries of the dying men and horses, the
whoops and battle cries, and the angry buzzing of
arrows through the air. But here, Jamuka's greater
experience and years of warrior training easily
overpowered the inexperienced Temujin. The
Secret History reports this loss in few
words. They formed up into three units;
rode against Jamuka. He was forced
back then by Jamuka, and escaped
into the Jerene Gorge on the Onon
River. With Temujin defeated, the wrath of Jamuka
was terrible. In retribution for siding with
the upstart, Jamuka ordered that 70 princes
of the Chinoa clan be boiled alive in great
iron cauldrons. One leader's head was cut off, and
Jamuka tied it to his horse's tail and dragged
it behind him as he rode. Temujin's situation was
now worse than ever. He was now an outlaw, and
fled for his life with the riders of Jamuka
hot on his heels. He would not return to the
steppe for another ten years, and those years are a
gap in his biography. But some historians think
it likely that he went south to the lands
that lay across the great expanse of the Gobi
Desert, a domain of large wealthy cities, artists,
merchants, poets, and emperors, the lands of China.
China at the end of the 12th century was a divided
land. Since the days of the first emperors of the
Qin and Han Dynasty, the settled people who lived
in the floodplains around the Yangtse and Yellow
Rivers had fought bitterly with the nomadic horse-
riding peoples of the steppe, and since that time,
China's emperors had built numerous defenses on
their northern border that would become known as
the Great Wall. In the nearly ten centuries since
the time of the Han Dynasty, the Tang were the
first to unite the area of the central Chinese
plains, but after the collapse of that dynasty, a
period of chaos and dissolution followed known
as the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period.
Eventually, around the year 1000, the plains of
China united once more under the Song Dynasty. The
Song were ethnically Han Chinese, the majority
ethnic group of China, and under their reign, the
people of the central plains had flourished.
Over the next 100 years, China's population
would double, so that by the year 1100, more than
100 million people, or one-third of the planet's
entire human population, could be found there.
China at this time was the undisputed center of
the world, and technologically the most advanced
civilization on Earth. But in the 1120s, disaster
struck. The Jurchen were a people from the oak
and pine forests of Manchuria, near the border
with Korea, where Siberian tigers were known to
roam, and to the Chinese in the south, these Jurchen
were considered barbarians. They were mostly
not nomadic and lived in villages, but they
were a horse-rearing people, and they rode and
fought as horse archers in much the same way
as the Mongols. Once subservient to another
Manchurian people known as the Khitan, they
had overthrown their former masters and now
swept across Northern China in a tide of
conquest. The Chinese Song Dynasty, weakened by
internal divisions and taken by surprise, could
do little to stop them. In a disaster that the Song
would rue for centuries, Jurchen horsemen swept south
and seized the lands around the northern Yellow
River, pushing south, and even capturing the former
Song capital of Kaifeng. From this point onwards, the
lands of Northern China would be ruled by these
Jurchen, and their new emperor would crown himself
with a title that elevated him above the other
peoples of the steppe. He was now the Golden Khan,
and his empire would be known as the Jin or Golden
Empire. The Jurchen Jin Dynasty of Northern China
was what has been called a conquest dynasty; that
is one founded by outside invaders, but throughout
Chinese history, these kinds of conquerors had
always learned that military might was not the
only kind of power, that culture too had its own
kind of force. Over time, the founders of these
conquest dynasties often adopted the Chinese
language, began to live by Confucian ideals and
dress in Chinese clothes, intermarry with the locals,
and gradually become every bit as Chinese as the
Chinese. The Jurchen were no different. In fact, over
the century that they ruled Northern China, they
adopted the Chinese language so enthusiastically
that very few written texts in the Jurchen language
have survived. Just 30 years after their conquest,
one Jin emperor known as the Prince of Hailing
even began writing Chinese poetry and drinking
Chinese tea, something that his hardy forbears
would have mocked. But no matter how many Chinese
manners or customs they adopted, the Jin would
always be considered outside barbarians by the
Song Chinese in the south, who referred to them
as slaves and dog-sheep, and dreamed of one
day retaking their lost lands and uniting China
once more. For the next two centuries, China would
be divided into these two halves, the Chinese Song in
the rugged and tropical south, and the Jurchen Jin in
the dry and arid north, with their border along the
Huai River, roughly halfway between the Yangtse and
Yellow Rivers. There was almost constant warfare
between them as they seized forts and border towns
from one another whenever the opportunity arose,
but neither side was ever able to gain the upper
hand. Since they themselves had once swept out of
the wilderness and seized the cities of China, the
Jurchen rulers of the Jin Dynasty knew all too
well how quickly a new threat could develop in
those wild lands, and they were determined not
to be caught by surprise as the Song had been. As
a result, the Jin operated a policy of using
nomads to fight nomads. On their frontier, the Jin
Dynasty employed what were called juyin. These were
their border guards, vassals, and subject states,
along with mercenaries, who they paid handsomely
to create a buffer zone between them and the other
peoples of the north. These juyin border guards would
raid and plunder other steppe peoples whenever they
became too powerful, and suppressed any chance of
a united power emerging in the Mongolian steppe, and
when any one group of juyin themselves became
too powerful, the Jin would shift their support
to a different people and bring them tumbling
down in turn. The southern Chinese writer Zhao
Gong recounts this practice, with the usual Song
contempt for their northern rivals. When the Tartars
were in their original countries, during the
Jin cowards’ reign, there was a rumor spoken;
the Tartars are coming. Every three years they would
dispatch troops to the farthest frontiers and wastes
of the north to destroy and kill, and called
it decreasing the number of fighting men. The
Tartars fled and concealed themselves in the sandy
deserts, and hatred entered the marrow of their
bones. This brutal policy had been remarkably
successful. Constantly beset by punitive raids,
the peoples of the north like the Mongols
had remained bitterly divided, crippled by
blood feuds and rivalries, of which the life of
Temujin gives just a glimpse. Zhao Gong describes
the chaotic state of the steppe during this time. At
present, the Tartars are very simple and wild, and
they have almost no institutions. I have studied
and researched this, and have found that they
prosper and decline, rise and are destroyed, with
no regularity. The brutal Jin policy had created
immense hardship, but they also provided something
of a safety net. For any group facing extinction
in the steppe, there always remained this one way
of surviving, to enter the service of the Jin and
defend the borders of their empire. It's thought
that after losing his battle with Jamuka, Temujin
may have fled south into the borderlands of the
Jin Empire with what remained of his followers,
and there sold his services as a juyin. If this
is where Temujin spent those ten years, then it's
here that he would hone his skills as a leader and
strategist, and he would learn lessons in brutality.
In the winter of 1196, the Jin paid him to attack
the wealthy steppe people known as the Tartars.
The Tartars had actually been juyin border guards
themselves, and had grown rich from all the loot
they had plundered on behalf of the Jin, but now
the Jin Dynasty feared that their loyal attack
dogs had become too powerful. They employed Temujin’s
Mongols and their overlords, the powerful Kereyit
people, to attack the Tartars and reduce any threat
they might eventually pose. Since the Tartars had
once poisoned his father, Temujin must have been
all too happy to accept, as The Secret History
recalls. When he learned the news, Temujin said, “From
days of old, the Tartars have been a hateful folk
who murdered the grandfathers and fathers.
In this opportunity, let us join in on this
attack.” The ruler of the Kereyits, Toghril
Khan, also had reason to hate the Tartars. He
had once been the anda or blood brother
of Temujin's murdered father, Yesugei,
and in this period would become something of a
father figure to Temujin. Together they rode out
against their joint enemy, and in a surprise
attack swept into Tartar lands and plundered
them mercilessly. The Mongols were amazed by
the rich trade goods they seized from the
tents and treasure carts of the Tartars. They
noticed that even the children of the Tartars
had gold rings in their noses and wore sable
cloaks stitched with gold. The Jin Dynasty
were delighted with Temujin's work, and promoted him
to the rank of jeutau, or pacification officer. Looting
the Tartars brought his band great wealth and
doubtless more followers, too, and it solidified
his relationship with the powerful Toghril Khan. From
this point on, Temujin became his right-hand man, and
his power began to grow. One people known
as the Jurkin had raided some of Temujin's camps
while he was away on his war with the Tartars,
and so, when he returned home, he rounded on them.
But instead of simply taking their animals and
chasing them off, as was usually the way on the
steppe, he rounded up their leadership and executed
every one. Then, to the common people of the Jurkin,
he gave an offer; to join the Mongols, not as slaves
as would have been usual, but as members of the
clan. He even gave his mother an orphan Jurkin
boy to adopt, symbolically accepting him as his
brother. The Jurkin must have been perplexed,
but many of them accepted his deal. This was a
new way of doing things on the steppe, and suddenly
the established elite of Mongolia began to get
nervous. These old, powerful Khans rallied around the
one person they thought could challenge Temujin,
in fact, the only man who had ever beaten
him in battle; his own blood brother, Jamuka.
These old Khans gathered and crowned Jamuka
with an ancient and powerful title, Gur Khan,
meaning something like Khan over Khans. The only thing
standing between Jamuka and his final victory was
Temujin. When Temujin and Jamuka met in
battle for the final time, the year was
1201.Both sides gathered their horsemen,
who by now would have numbered in the
many thousands. Wars in Mongolia were fought
with horse and spear, with bow and arrow and
sword. One Chinese chronicler, Peng Daya, writes an
account of the typical equipment of a Mongol
warrior. Their weapons and armor consist of scale
armor, chain mail with leather six layers deep, and
tough sheep-horn bows. They whittle wood for
the shafts and take down birds of prey for the
feathers. Their scimitars follow the Westerner
style; light and sharp. They have long and short
spears with tips like drills, so that what is
speared does not slip off, and they can penetrate
heavy armor. They have defensive shields of short-
stemmed bamboo or else of willow tied with leather.
But as well as these physical weapons,
battles in Mongolia were also fought with
magic. Both sides would bring their most
powerful shamans to the battlefield, and
these holy men were considered to have
exceptional abilities at their disposal;
to turn away enemy arrows, cause their shields and
bowstrings to break, and even use enchanted stones
to control the weather. The great respect
that all Mongols held for these shamans
meant that they actually had a very real
psychological effect on the battlefield.
In a narrow contest that could go either way, an
impressive display of shamanic power could even
make the difference between an army standing
and fighting or panicking and running, between
victory and defeat. On the day of the battle, as
the horsemen clashed and arrows flew in angry
swarms through the air, it was Temujin’s shamans
who seemed to win the day. As the battle wore
on, the clouds darkened, and a great steppe
storm swept down over the bloodstained
grasslands. When they were pushing each
other back and forth, up and down the
slope, and reforming their own ranks, at
that very moment, the shamans of Jamuka
performed the weather-stone magic. But
the weather magic reversed, and the magic
fell on themselves. Then, saying to each
other, “Heaven is not pleased with us”, they
scattered. Jamuka now fled just as Temujin once
had. Over the next few years, he would
regroup with some of his men, but many could
now see which way the wind was blowing. Some
of Jamuka's followers betrayed him, hoping that
if they handed him over to Temujin, they would
curry favor with the new ascendant lord of the
steppe. When they came to Temujin with their captive,
however, they were disappointed. For their reward,
Temujin had them all put to death, condemning them
in the following terms. People
who laid hands on their own ruler, how can
they be allowed to live? Who would befriend
such people? Execute them all, down to their
offspring. But his rival Jamuka could not be
allowed to live. Despite their sworn bond, Temujin
ordered that he be killed. Perhaps as a sign of
the love they had once held for one another, the
deed was done in the most noble manner according
to Mongol tradition; that is without shedding any
of his blood. Jamuka was likely strangled or his
back broken, and his body was buried. With the
killing of Jamuka, Temujin's childhood died, too, and a
new man was born. The war of the Khans had come
to an end, and now Temujin’s claim to be Khan of all
the Mongols faced no opposition. Before long, other
peoples of the steppe fell before his horsemen; the
Naiman, the Jadaran, the Oirat, the Tayichyut, and the Tartars.
In each clan that fell to him, the elites and nobles
were killed, but as with the Jurkin, the commoners
were absorbed into the Mongol army, and Temujin's
mother Oelun would ceremoniously adopt an orphaned
child of their people as Temujin's brother. As a
system, it was immensely symbolic and ruthlessly
effective. Eventually, even his mentor Toghril, the
Khan of the Kereyit, recognized how powerful his
protege had become. He turned on Temujin and tried
to have him killed, but he too was swept aside.
Now around the age of seventy, Toghril was defeated
at a clash remembered as the Battle of the Burning
Sands. Now there was no one left to stand
in Temujin's way. Temujin was the undisputed
overlord of virtually all the peoples of Mongolia,
and the commander of as many as 100,000 horsemen.
In a grand kuriltai ceremony in the year 1206,
he gathered all the peoples he had conquered, and
declared himself the emperor of the eastern steppe. When
he was crowned, he chose to rule not with the old
traditional title of Gur Khan that Jamuka had chosen,
but with a new title. This title would symbolize
that things in the world of the steppe were about
to change, that Temujin would be the kind of ruler
that Asia had never seen before. The meaning of
this title is much debated, and meant something
like Great Khan, righteous king, or oceanic emperor.
But soon it would be known all around the world,
a title that in the Mongolian language was
pronounced Chinggis Khan.
The title that Temujin chose to rule under
has suffered much from translation through
the ages. From Mongolian, it entered the Persian
language relatively unscathed as Chengiz Khan,
but when these sources were translated into Arabic,
the confusion began. Arabic has no C-H, ‘ch’ sound,
and so, they used their letter J to make it Jengiz
Khan. European scholars would later translate these
sources into Latin, and eventually into English
in the 19th century, at which time the translators
used the letter G to denote a soft sound like
in general or German. But due to the ambiguous
pronunciation of the letter G in English, this soon
led to an extremely common mispronunciation, Genghis
Khan. The mispronunciation is so widespread today
that Genghis Khan has arguably become the standard
way that the name is pronounced in English, but
for the sake of correctness, in this episode I
will pronounce the name Chinggis, as it is said in
Mongolia today. Beyond the pronunciation of his
name, much else is mysterious about the figure
of Chinggis Khan, not least his appearance. No
artistic representations were ever made of him
during his life or by anyone who met him. As a
result, those imaginary depictions we do have
are deeply influenced by the artist's cultural
background. In one Chinese portrait of the Great
Khan made after his death, he appears painted like
a Chinese emperor, wearing a white Mongolian-style
robe. Meanwhile, in the Persian miniature paintings,
he is depicted wearing a great golden crown,
or later as a Persian prince with a feathered
turban, necklaces of pearls, or dressed in fine silk
and brocades. In Europe, too, he would be depicted
with European features, with fine fur cloaks
and a gown of flowing silk, sporting a handsome
moustache. Written descriptions of him could be
no less fragmentary. The Chinese writer Zhao Gong
writes one rare account of his appearance. On the
whole, the Tartars are not very tall, the tallest
not exceeding five feet and three or four inches.
They grow extremely little facial hair. The Tartar lord
Temujin differs in that he is of a large and noble bearing,
with a broad forehead and long whiskers, and cuts a
heroic, robust figure. The 13th-century Persian
writer, Minhaj al-Siraj Juzjani, writes another rare
description of what he looked like, although he got
his account third-hand, and never saw the Great Khan
himself. A man of tall stature, of vigorous build,
robust in body, the hair on his face scanty and
turned white, with cat's eyes, possessed
of dedicated energy, discernment, genius,
and understanding, awestriking, a butcher, just,
resolute, an overthrower of enemies, intrepid,
bloodthirsty, and cruel. He was adept at magic
and deception, and some of the devils were his
friends. Historians have never settled exactly
what Juzjani means when he says that Chinggis
Khan had cat's eyes. This may have referred
to the epicanthic folds that are typical of
the faces of Mongolians and many peoples in
East Asia, and may have been worthy of mention
to the Persian chronicler, but it may also
indicate that Chinggis Khan had a striking
and unusual eye color, perhaps a bright
yellow that occurs in rare cases, with
a higher incidence in East Asia. Throughout these
sources, Chinggis Khan is elusive, insubstantial, and
mysterious, but the changes he brought about
in the world would be immense, and after conquering
much of the world of the steppe, the man who was
once Temujin began the work of building a
state. The empire that Chinggis Khan would forge, he
would call the Yeke Mongol Ulus, or the Great Mongol
State, but he also referred to it informally and
affectionately as the people of the felt walls,
referring to the felt tents that characterized
the nomadic way of life. The empire was a vast
confederation, covering a land area roughly the
size of Western Europe, and comprising at least
one million people and probably 20 million herd
animals, but it was an empire of grass, an empire
without cities, without governors or administrators.
To make sense of this organizational nightmare,
Chinggis Khan embarked on a dramatic restructuring
of Mongol society. He would tear out the old system
of clan loyalties and replace it with one based
around the military. He organized his warriors
according to an old decimal system that had been
used for centuries on the steppe, going back to the
time of the Xiongnu. His soldiers were placed
into squads of ten men called an arban, who lived
together and fought as brothers. These squads were
typically led by the eldest man. Ten of these arban
joined together to make a zagun, or a hundred men,
and these hundred voted to choose its leader. Ten
zagun made a mingan, or a thousand men, and ten
mingan made a tumen, an army of 10,000 Mongol
horsemen. This was considered to be a practical
size, large enough to be effective in battle, but
not so large that it could not move quickly or
ran into problems with supply. The leaders of these
tumen were chosen by Temujin personally. In this
way, the old messy clan system, which had fostered
infighting and backstabbing, had been replaced by
a regimented system that promoted coordination
and cooperation. The Persian scholar Ata-Malik
Juvaini, writing in the service of the Mongols in
the 1250s, gushes about the great success of these
reforms. God Almighty in wisdom and intelligence
distinguished Chingiz Khan in alertness of mind
and absoluteness of power, and exalted him above
all the kings of the world so that all that had
been recorded touching the ways of the pharaohs
and Caesars was by Chingiz Khan, invented from
the page of his own mind. He established a rule
for every occasion and a regulation for every
circumstance, while for every crime he fixed a
penalty. Every Mongol of all ages and genders
were now required to give one day a week of
public service, either in the army or working on
public projects. These could be herding animals and
collecting milk, gathering dung for fuel, or making
felt from wool. Sometimes their service could
simply be to serve food at a feast, or to sing and
entertain the troops. Chinggis Khan worked to
end the feuding that had for centuries defined
the harsh reality of Mongol life. Previously, the
only justice on the steppe was the vengeance you
could exact on those who wronged you, which had
the tendency to bring about cycles of reprisal
and violence that echoed down the generations.
But Temujin introduced a series of laws that
he would call the Great Law or Yassa. Since the
Mongols had no written script, they adopted the
writing system of the nearby Uighur people, and
copied these laws down in a series of books with
bright blue bindings, as the Persian scholar Juvaini
recalls. These rolls are called the Great Book of
the Yassa, and are kept in the treasury of the chief
princes. Whenever a Khan ascends the throne, or a great
army is mobilized, or the princes assemble and
begin to consult together concerning affairs of
state and the administration thereof, they produce
these rolls and model their actions there on. Each
one of the new laws that Chinggis Khan wrote seemed
to be directly influenced by his own experiences
in earlier life. One of his first laws was to
forbid the kidnapping of women on the Mongol steppe.
He had come close to losing his wife Borte in this
way, and knew the pain of it firsthand, and his own
mother Oelun had been kidnapped by his father. In
this way, it must have been a deeply personal issue,
but kidnapping was also one of the main causes of
friction on the steppe, and had sparked countless
bitter feuds. Outlawing it completely would bring
peace, where before there had been only conflict.
He also outlawed the taking of other Mongols as
slaves. After being kept as a slave by the Tayichyut,
this issue seems to have arisen from his own
bitter memories, although there would be no law
against taking slaves from other steppe peoples.
He also outlawed the theft of animals, and brought
in regulations on when people could hunt,
banning hunting throughout the breeding season,
so that stocks of game animals would not become
depleted. Finally, he began the introduction of what
would become a law that guaranteed a degree of
religious protection to his subjects, perhaps the
first law of its kind in the Middle Ages, as Juvaini
records. Being the adherent of no religion and
the follower of no creed, he rejected bigotry
and the preference of one faith to another, and the
placing of some above others. Rather, he honored and
respected the learned and the pious of every sect,
recognizing such conduct as the way to the court
of God. These laws may sound idealistic
to us today, but they were also pragmatic. Religious
conflicts could cause ruptures between
different families and clans, and damage
the cohesion of the empire. But now all the steppe
peoples, whether Muslim, Christian, Buddhist, or
like him, a worshipper of Tengri and the Great
Blue Sky, would all share equal protection under
the law. Certain religious practices like the
slaughter of halal meat were outlawed, sometimes
on penalty of death, so it has been contested
how much we can really call this religious
freedom, but it was still a radical new vision
for what kind of state the Mongol Empire could
be. On top of these reforms, Chinggis Khan
created a new inner heartland for the
empire. This was the original homeland
of the Mongols, the region where the rivers
Onon, Kherlen, and Tuul found their source, and
where he had once sheltered from the Tayichyut
warriors who had hunted him. This was the land
centered around the mountain Burkan Khaldun. Only
members of his close family and inner court
were allowed to venture into this private
land, and it was here that Mongol royalty
would bury their dead for centuries to
come. At the head of Mongol society sat Chinggis
Khan and his inner court, which in Mongolian was
known as an ordu, a word that means something
like great tent, and is the origin of the
English word horde. The word Mongol itself has a
somewhat uncertain origin, perhaps deriving from
the Mongolian phrase ‘Mongkhe-tengri-gal’, meaning
eternal sky fire, or from the word ‘mongu’, meaning
silver. It had been used for some time about all
the scattered clans like Yesugei’s and Temujin’s, but
now everyone who lived in the empire was
considered a Mongol citizen. But much to
the Mongols’ frustration, they struggled to get
anyone outside of the steppe to call them by that
name. For much of their history, people in China,
Persia, the Middle East, and Europe all insisted
on calling them by the name of what had been up
until then the largest and most powerful of the
steppe peoples, the Tartars. They did this sometimes
out of calculated disrespect and sometimes out of
genuine confusion, and despite Mongol insistence
that they were not Tartars but Mongols, the
name stuck. Still, despite all the reforms of
Chinggis Khan, Mongol society still remained a
fragile entity, and its people still lived lives
of poverty and subsistence in the harsh land of
the steppe. Chinggis Khan knew that his people would
remain united only as long as they had an enemy
to fight together, and if no such enemy arose,
they would return to their old ways; fight one
another and tear his new empire apart. Partly for
this reason, he began to cast his gaze beyond the
high plateau of the Mongolian steppe, and hunger for
wars of conquest and the riches they could bring.
While the Jin and Song divided the river
plains of China between them, there was
a third smaller kingdom to their west, known as
the Western Xia. This was located partly in the
hilly upper reaches of the Yellow River
and the dry desert regions to the north
of the Tibetan Plateau, known as the Hexi
Corridor. This had been a strategic trade
route for the past thousand years, since the
time of the Han Dynasty, and it's through this
narrow passage that the vast majority of Silk
Road goods passed on huge caravans of Bactrian
camels. Like the Jin, the Western Xia were a
conquest dynasty, ruled by a people known as
the Tanguts, nomadic Buddhists from the region
of Tibet. Their society was a hybrid, including
both nomadic herders not unlike the Mongols,
and the settled cities full of Chinese, Turkic, and
Tibetan peoples, with a booming economy based
on Silk Road trade. This was the smallest and
weakest kingdom bordering the steppe, and it had
recently sheltered some enemies of Chinggis Khan,
who had fled from his conquest. For this reason, the
Tanguts were the first prey upon which he set his
sights. At first, the Mongols initiated a series
of raids on their border forts, testing their
defenses, but in the year 1209, Chinggis Khan
gathered his horde and descended on their borders.
When they got news that the Khan was
marching on their lands, the Tanguts sent
out messengers begging for help from
their neighbors, the powerful Jin and
Song Dynasties in the south, but neither the
Jin nor the Song sent any aid. The ruler of
the Jin Dynasty, known as Prince Shao of Wei, is even
recorded to have sent the following dismissive
reply. It is to our advantage when our enemies
attack one another. Wherein lies the danger to
us? As we will see, this pattern would repeat itself
in almost all the lands that the Mongols arrived
in. At various points, a coordinated and united
response might have stopped their advance, but
everywhere, local rivalries prevented anyone from
uniting against them. In the desert regions, the
Mongols easily overwhelmed the Tangut armies,
but the walled cities of Western Xia proved to
be a much greater obstacle. The Mongols had
no siege equipment, no ladders or battering
rams, no catapults or engineers, and so, all they
could do was surround the fortresses, gaze up at
their towering walls, and try to starve the Tangut
people into surrender. This was highly unpalatable
for Mongol warriors, who delighted in moving
quickly, striking fast, and always finding new
grasslands for their horses. The Mongols encircled
the Tanguts in their capital of Yinchuan, but it was
a powerful fortress guarded by an army of
150,000 soldiers. At the sight of the Mongol
army, the Tanguts simply disappeared behind their
walls and refused to be baited out for battle. In
an act of desperation, at one point the Mongols
even attempted to dam the Yellow River in the
hope of redirecting it into the city, flooding it
and undermining the foundations of its walls. But
the river instead flooded the Mongols’ camp. Still,
the Tanguts had enough of the destruction,
and soon sued for peace. The Secret History of
the Mongols records their plea to the Great
Khan. If Chinggis Khan shows us favor, then
we the Tangut people shall bring
forth many camels reared in the shelter
of the tall feather grass. We shall weave
woolen material and make satin, and then we
shall give them to you. Training falcons to
fly loose at game, we shall gather them,
and all the best ones we shall send to you.
Sources in southern Song China recorded
the subjugation of the Tanguts with a
mixture of contempt and amusement.
From their perspective, a hated rival
had been bested by mere barbarians. The Song
writer Li Xinchuan records this event with a
sneer. The black Tartars became increasingly
powerful. Having gradually unified the clan
lands, they then raised a great army and
attacked Hexi. Within several years, all
the districts and prefectures of Hexi had been
sacked. They even forcibly carried off a false
princess of the Xia kingdom in departing,
and the Xia actually had to serve them as
vassals. In the decade that followed, the
situation would not seem so amusing to the
Song. The conquest of the Western Xia had proven
the effectiveness of the Mongol war machine, but
it had also exposed a number of glaring weaknesses.
Walled cities had frustrated and slowed the Mongol
advance, and it became clear that if they hoped to
tackle even larger prey, something would have to
change. One Chinese writer, Xu Ting, records
how the Mongol conquest of the Tanguts
set the stage for ever greater expansion. The
Tartars in the beginning were primitively
ignorant and lacked even a single of the
known crafts. Only later, when they conquered
the Westerners, did they begin to have products,
craftsmen, and mechanisms. The craftmanship of
the Westerners is extremely refined. Especially
fine are their instruments of siege warfare.
But the Tanguts simply ruled over the trade
corridor that transported the goods from
east to west. Chinggis Khan knew that even
greater wealth could be found in the lands
where those goods were actually produced; the
lands of China. All he needed was an excuse for
war, and that would come with the death of the
Golden Khan of the Jin Dynasty in the year 1208 AD.
When the old Golden Khan of the Jin died,
his young son, Prince Shao of Wei, took the
throne. This young man had heard of the
rise of Chinggis Khan to the north of the Gobi
Desert, the mysterious character who had united
the peoples of the steppe, but it had so far not
particularly troubled him, other than the annoying
fact that this new ruler had stopped paying him
tribute. The new Golden Khan ruled a sprawling
empire of more than 50 million people, perhaps
the most populous and powerful in the world at
the time. Their armies totaled 600,000 men, mostly
comprised of armored pikemen and crossbowmen.
They commanded perhaps the most technologically
advanced forces on Earth, even experimenting with
early gunpowder weaponry, and on top of that, their
steppe roots in the region of Manchuria meant that
they still fielded a mighty cavalry force of
more than 150,000 horsemen, dispersed as cavalry
divisions among their various armies. The Mongols
looked weak in comparison. Their forces totaled
no more than about 100,000 horse-archers, with
not a single footsoldier among them, and
the Jin were confident that no one could
lead an army across the Gobi Desert large enough
to threaten them. For this reason, this young Jin
emperor had every reason to be confident. One Song
Chinese writer, Zhao Gong, recalls their attitude. The
Jin said about the Tartars, “Our country is like
the sea. Your country is like two handfuls of
sand. How could you shake us?” The Tartars to this
day, young and old, can all remember these words.
It's perhaps this confidence that would lead
to the terrible mistake he
would make in the year 1210 AD.
Every new emperor began his reign by
sending out envoys to the empire's subjects, those
kingdoms and peoples who had sworn allegiance
to his father, to ask them to swear loyalty to
him in turn and recommit to whatever tribute
they had previously been paying. As part of this
process, he sent one envoy across the Gobi Desert
to demand that their previous juyin border guard,
Chinggis Khan, come south and make a gesture
of loyalty and submission to the new Golden
Khan of the Jin. When the envoys arrived, they would
have met with Chinggis Khan, who was now nearly 50
years old. If he had ever seen the value in bowing
and scraping to the lords of the south, those days
were now very much behind him. When the Chinese
envoys met him, they asked him to send word of his
submission to the Jin. The later Chinese source,
the Yuan Shi, describes what happened next. Chinggis
Khan asked the Jin messengers, “Who is the new
emperor?” The messengers of the emperor replied, “The
Prince of Wei.” Chinggis Khan turned his face to the
south, spat in that direction, and said, “I thought
that the Emperor of the Middle Kingdom should be
a man blessed by Heaven. Can he be such an ordinary
and weak man? Why should I show him respect?”
Then he mounted his horse and rode to the north.
The Jin envoys left, shaken at their encounter,
and Chinggis Khan deliberated on his course of
action. His insult to the Jin would likely
bring a military response; that is, unless
he moved first. But he must have been full
of doubts and fears about taking on such a
powerful enemy. To find the best course of action,
he would need to speak to his god. To do this, he
climbed up the slopes of the sacred mountain,
Burkan Khaldun, through the forests of larch and
elegant Siberian pine, and there on its stony
peak, surrounded by twisted rock formations, he
prayed to Tengri, the god of the Great Blue
Sky, to ask him what to do. According to The
Secret History, when the sun rose on the
fourth day, Chinggis Khan emerged with his
answer. The eternal blue sky
has promised us victory and
vengeance. In the spring of 1211, the vast horde
of the Mongols gathered and set out on its march
south across the Gobi Desert. The sight of this
force would have been terrifying. Overhead, pennants
and banners flew, and at the head of the army flew
the great spirit banner of Chinggis Khan, woven from
the tail hairs of hundreds of black horses. Every
Mongol warrior rode with five spare mounts at a
time, so with an army of 100,000 horsemen, they
would have brought with them an extra half a
million horses, and probably the same number of
sheep and goats. With them also came giant supply
carts pulled by as many as twenty oxen and thousands
of Bactrian camels, some carrying enormous drums that
were beaten to signal the men and rally them
for battle. This was an invasion force, but it
was also a mass migration, an enormous traveling
city designed to flatten everything in its
path. The people who would have stood and watched
this pandemonium approaching across the desert in
a great cloud of dust were known as the Ongut.
They were a desert people that for years had
been serving as juyin border guards for the Jin,
keeping their empire safe from steppe raiders. But
upon seeing the enormous Mongol army approaching,
the Ongut reassessed their position. These border
nomads welcomed the Mongols as brothers, and even
showed them the most direct route south through
the narrow mountain passes, right into the heart
of the Jin lands. The invasion of China had begun.
The Mongols’ strategy was always to attack
in multiple places at once, sowing maximum
fear and confusion, and giving the appearance
that their forces were much more numerous than
they were. For this reason, while Chinggis Khan
led his forces in the west, his general Jebe
led an army into the east. The Song Chinese
writer Zhao Gong describes what happened
next. Temujin, indignant over their
bullying and insults, invaded the
frontier. The frontier prefectures
were all conquered, and their people
killed. The Mongols took these border forts and
then crossed through the mountains. They first met
Jin resistance at a place called Badger’s Mouth Pass,
and there they smashed the Jin army sent to face
them. The Mongols broke through the mountains
by autumn of 1211, and spilled out into the
Chinese heartland. For the next three years,
the Mongols pillaged the entire North
China plain, and for much of this time,
the Jin were powerless to stop
them. Part of the reason for this was the
immense mobility of Mongol armies. Jin
armies were enormous and well-equipped, but they
were also slow. Typically containing twice as
many infantry as cavalry, they lumbered across
the land at a snail's pace, and needed to be
constantly supplied with food brought by wagon
along precarious supply routes. Meanwhile, the
Mongols could disappear and reappear anywhere
they liked, allowing them to ambush and destroy
whole Jin armies in the field, and everything
the Mongols needed they brought with them.
Their horseback armies lived on milk and meat
from their animals, and in times of difficulty
would even open up a vein on their horses
necks and drink the blood directly from their
mounts. They would place strips of raw meat under
their saddles in the morning so that the flesh
was tenderized throughout the day of riding,
so that it could be eaten raw in the evening.
In this way, they could camp without lighting
fires that would give away their position to
enemy scouts. One Jin officer, Tu Shanyi, gave the
following appraisal of the desperate situation.
Since the Mongolian army is on horseback, it goes
into the plain in only one body, but we
defend ourselves divided. Our defeat is
certain. The Mongols relied on surprise and
deception in a way that completely blindsided
the Jin generals, who conducted their wars
according to a long-established system
of martial honor. One Song Chinese writer named
Peng Daya describes their array of inventive and
unscrupulous tactics. The Tartars do things that
are not addressed in the ancient techniques. If
the enemy puts up a strong defense that all
the Tartars’ plans fail to penetrate, they drive
cattle at them or lash wild horses toward them,
using animals to disturb the enemy's ranks. Seldom
does it fail to defeat them. When their own troops
are few, sometimes the Tartars will drag branches
behind them, making dust rise to the heavens, and
leading the enemy to suspect that their troops
are many. When victorious, they dog the enemy's tail
until the last man is killed, not permitting any
to escape, but if they are the ones defeated,
they scatter in all four directions, beyond
pursuit. The Mongols had learned how to turn the
Jin's great strengths against them. One of these
strengths was their large population, and the
other, their powerful walled cities. But these
could also be weaknesses. The Mongols exploited
these by borrowing tactics that they had learned
hunting animals on the steppe. They would devastate
the countryside for miles around, which drove
vast numbers of refugees towards the only safe
places left; the walled cities. Soon, they would be
flooded with desperate and hungry people, and
their storehouses ran out of food. These mighty
fortresses now became tombs from which no one
could escape. The Mongols also rounded up huge
numbers of peasants from the countryside and forced
them to work, filling in defensive ditches and
moats, pushing siege engines, and dismantling the
city's defenses. Each Mongol warrior was tasked
with gathering up ten peasants for this purpose.
The defenders on the city walls were left with
the brutal choice of allowing their defenses to
be destroyed by these unwilling laborers, or using
up their arrows to slaughter their own people. The
Chinese writer Li Xinchuan describes this ruthless
tactic. In the cities, villagers were drafted as
soldiers and sent up onto the walls to defend them.
The Tartars drove their family members on to the
attack, and fathers and sons and older and younger
brothers would often shout at each other from afar
in mutual recognition. For this reason, the people
had no will to fight, and all the walled towns that
the Tartars reached surrendered at the first drum
roll. Prisoners of war were also conscripted to
fight for their Mongol captors, with the promise
that if they proved themselves in battle, they
would be freed and allowed to join the Mongol
army. But despite their reputation for brutality,
Chinggis Khan and his warriors also practiced
the judicious use of restraint. Sieges were costly
and time consuming, and he hoped that by showing
mercy to those cities that surrendered without a
fight, he would increase the likelihood of others
doing the same. Cities that opened their gates
to the Mongols were thoroughly looted of their
treasure, but their people were spared. Still,
those cities that resisted were slaughtered
mercilessly, and in the countryside, the death
and destruction was rampant, as Li Xinchuan
describes. The massacre of the people was almost
total. Gold, silk, boys, girls, cattle, sheep, horses,
and other livestock, all were rolled up like a mat
and carried off. Houses and cottages were burned
down. The walls and ramparts became deserted
ruins. It's likely that the Mongols had
not intended to undertake a full invasion of
China, but more like a series of large raids
into these wealthy lands. But the more success
they met with, the longer they decided to stay.
As the war entered its second and third years
and the Mongol armies still rampaged unchecked,
the Jin became desperate. They began drafting
civilians into their army en masse, and even
pardoned any criminal who would take up arms and
fight. But the Mongols could not be stopped. Soon,
they were pushing far enough south to reach the
Jin capital on the site of modern Beijing, then
known as Zhongdu. They laid eyes on the walls of the
city in the year 1214, three years after the war had
started. Beijing at the time was among the
largest cities on Earth. Records show that
it had a population of nearly a million people, and
was defended by an 18-km rectangle of rammed Earth
walls, rising up to twelve meters high, broken by twelve
gates and 900 guard towers, ringed by a triple moat. Its
walls were topped with powerful crossbows and
trebuchets capable of hurling projectiles more
than 300 meters. The Mongols laid siege of the city,
but had little success in breaking through its
defenses. Even for them, this final prize must
have seemed like a step too far. They were now
dangerously overstretched, a long way from home,
and facing some of the world's most formidable
fortifications. On top of that, the climate didn't
suit them. Summer in this part of the world was
hot, and plague was beginning to spread among
their army. Their men and horses were exhausted,
and they increasingly longed to return to the
cool lands of Mongolia. Chinggis Khan sent word to
the Jin emperor that he was willing to accept
terms for peace, with the following demands for
tribute. God has made you so weak that should I
further molest you, I fear how Heaven would judge
me. I'm willing to withdraw my army. What provision
will you make to still the demands of my officers?
Many in the Jin court urged the emperor to
keep fighting. They argued that the shame of
surrendering to these barbarians would be too
great for the dynasty to bear, and the city of
Beijing could never be taken while a determined
force defended it. But luckily for the Mongols,
the political situation in the Jin Empire was
rapidly disintegrating. Having lost the confidence
of his court after two years of failure, the young
Golden Khan of the Jin, the Prince of Wei, had been
assassinated the year earlier, and his nephew was
placed on the throne by a military coup. This man,
named Xuanzong of Jin, was now facing another
plot in the palace that threatened to topple him.
Rather than deal with both the Mongols and
his own treacherous courtiers, he decided to
finally sue for peace. He accepted a humiliating
series of conditions, recognizing himself as a
vassal to Chinggis Khan, giving the Khan one of
his daughters to marry, and massive amounts of
gold, silver, and silk, along with 500 young men and
women of the court to take away as slaves. With
these crushing terms, the war came to an end. The
lands of Northern China breathed a sigh of relief,
and the Mongols rode north towards the Gobi Desert
and home. The Jin emperor had seemingly averted
further disaster, but he would soon make a critical
mistake. Summer was still here, and the Gobi Desert
was too hot to cross. For that reason, Chinggis
Khan camped on the southern side of the desert,
and waited for the cool months to come
before they could return to Mongolia with the
vast treasure of their successful raid in tow. But
then the Khan got news of something that would send
him flying into a rage. Word reached him that the
new Jin emperor was fleeing Beijing. The embattled
ruler was taking his forces and what remained of
his treasury with him, and retreating far into the
south to the old fortress of Kaifeng on the other
side of the Yellow River, an obstacle that the
Mongols had not yet been able to cross. This seemed
like a clear sign that the Jin did not intend to
keep their word. One chronicler recalls the enraged
words of Chinggis Khan. The Jin emperor made an
agreement with me, but now he has moved his capital
south. Evidently he mistrusts my word, and has
used the peace to deceive me. Instead of crossing
the desert and returning to his own lands, Chinggis
Khan wheeled his forces back around and marched
once again to the capital of Beijing. The writer
Li Xinchuan describes what happened next. In moon five,
the Jin ruler moved the capital to Kaifeng. The Tartars
heard about this and said, “To move right away after
making peace? This shows they are suspicious and
still harbor resentment. They purposely talked
peace only as a means to forestall us.” In the
autumn, moon eight, they again led troops to attack the
counties and prefectures of the central plains.
With the emperor gone, along with all his
personal troops, the city's people were left all
but defenseless. The remaining citizens’ garrison
of Beijing held out for eight agonizing months of
siege. Starvation soon spread. The Jin made several
attempts to relieve the city from the south, but
each army they sent was intercepted and ambushed
on the road. For the city’s defenders, it soon
became clear that no reinforcements would be
coming. On this realization, whole divisions
of Jin soldiers, particularly of the semi-nomadic
Khitan people, simply switched sides and joined the
Mongols. On the 1st of June 1215, the Mongols
finally broke through the walls. As a punishment
for holding out so long and for the betrayal
of the Jin emperor, the Mongols sacked the city,
and huge numbers of its people were put to
the sword. The writer Li Xinchuan describes the
destruction. The grandeur and beauty of Beijing's
palaces were the crowning achievement of ancient
and modern times. When the Tartars saw them, they
were so stunned and frightened, they did not
dare look up. Yet, not long afterward, the fires
set by their soldiers would burn for over a
month. What had once been the golden Jin
Empire now fractured into countless feuding
warlords fighting over territory, some
loyal to the Mongols; others defecting
to the Song Chinese in the south, and many
others still simply out for themselves. All
imperial authority north of the Yellow
River collapsed. One Jin Dynasty poet,
a blind man named Zhao Yuan, wrote a poem
about this time that he called the Song of
Helplessness. The eastern barbarians charge
and raid the fields of the western mountains.
God willing, they will fester, but how so, I
do not ever know. As I sip wine and watch
the years fleet by, I stumble, drunk, atop
the plateau, and sing the Song of Helplessness.
With Beijing in ruins, Chinggis Khan
left one of his generals behind in China to mop up
the remnants of the Jin, but it would not be
as easy as he thought, and the final conquest
of Northern China would take many more years. In
the south, the Song Chinese watched the destruction
with delight. Their old enemies had been utterly
smashed, and with the delightful irony that it
had come at the hands of another barbarian people.
The writer Zhao Gong describes with amusement how
members of the former Jin government and royal
family were now reduced to the level of manual
laborers. There are great men of the
vanquished Jin who have gotten mixed
up in odd jobs, falling as low as butchering
and peddling, or leaving to become bandits. All
of them are still referred to by their
old government titles. One family has a
number of men who push carts around the towns,
and who still call themselves Commissioner of
Transport. The destruction of the Mongol
invasion left its marks everywhere in the
landscape. City walls had been torn down. In
places, crops had been destroyed, since the
Mongols deliberately rode their horses over
the fields so that the land could return to
pastures for their animals. And the event sent
reverberations around the world. Sometime
afterwards, a delegation of diplomats traveled
to China from the region of Central Asia to
investigate what had happened. They arrived at
the ruins of Beijing, and the scenes of carnage
that they witnessed, they later related to the
Persian scholar Juzjani, who recounts them like
something out of a nightmare. When we arrived
near to the seat of the government of the Golden
Khan, from a considerable distance, a high white
mound appeared in sight. We supposed that that
white eminence was perhaps a hill of snow, and
we made inquiries of the guides and the people
of that part about it. They replied, “The whole
of it is the bones of men slain.” When we had
proceeded onwards another stage, the ground had
become so greasy and dark from human fat that it
was necessary for us to advance another three
stages on that same road until we came to dry
ground again. Through the infections arising from
that ground, some of our party became ill, and some
perished. When they reached the city
walls, they found similar scenes of slaughter.
On reaching the gate of the city,
we perceived in a place under a bastion
of the citadel an immense quantity of human
bones collected. Inquiry was made, and people
replied that on the day the city was captured,
60,000 young girls threw themselves from this
bastion of the fortress and destroyed
themselves, in order that they might not
fall captive into the hands of the Mongol
forces, and that all these were their bones.
The scholar Juzjani was a fierce critic of
the Mongols, and has been criticized for his
colorful exaggerations that occur
throughout his writings. He didn't
witness these scenes himself, and may have
exaggerated stories told to him. But either
way, it's clear that the destruction of
the Jin Dynasty left a terrible human
toll. When summer ended, Chinggis Khan rode back
across the Gobi Desert with all the gold and
assorted riches of Northern China packed on the
backs of his camels, leaving untold suffering
behind him. The bounty of silk alone was so
great that Mongol soldiers ran out of uses
for it. They began to use it as packing material
and rope to tie up their horses, and used silver
jugs as water troughs for their animals.
Precious metals, slaves, and other treasure
poured north back to Mongolia in a river of gold
that seemed never to end. The year was 1215; in the
Chinese calendar, the Year of the Pig, and the
Mongol Empire was now among the wealthiest on
Earth. History has remembered Chinggis Khan
as a bloodthirsty conqueror, a man hellbent
on subjugating the known world, but in fact, most
sources suggest that when he left China, conquest
was not the first thing on his mind. In fact, he
seemed satisfied. He had made his people wealthier
than they had ever dreamed, and destroyed all
nearby rivals. He now controlled a vast swathe of
territory that covered almost the entire length
of the Mongolian steppe and the Silk Road trade
that flowed across it. The Persian scholar
Ata-Malik Juvaini elegises this time of relative peace.
In the latter part of his reign, he had
brought about complete peace and quiet,
and security and tranquility, and had achieved
the extreme of prosperity and well-being. The
roads were secure and disturbances allayed, so
that whatever profit or gain was displayed
in the uppermost west or the furthermost
east, there merchants would bend their steps.
Chinggis Khan's empire now connected the wealthy
production areas of Song China with the rich
markets of Persia, Central Asia, and the Near East,
and he wanted to make the most of this profitable
route. When it came to the settled societies
that bordered him, he seems to have treated
his neighbors not as enemies to be conquered,
but as potential future customers. For years now,
he had been exchanging diplomatic missions
with his neighbors to the west, and in the
year 1218, this culminated in the sending of
a great trade delegation. This was a caravan
of hundreds of Bactrian camels, along with 450
merchants led by an Indian man named Jafar, who
were ordered to head into the west and contact
the wealthy empires that existed there in what is
today Iran, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan.
With them, they brought an enormous
wealth of goods to trade, as Juzjani recounts,
with perhaps some of his characteristic
exaggeration. Among the rarities and presents that
the Chenggis Khan sent was a nugget of pure gold as
big as a camel's neck. Also, he dispatched 500
camels laden with gold, silver, and silks, beaver
furs, sable, and elegant and ingenious things of
China and the desert regions. This trade delegation
was a clear statement of the new empire's power
and wealth, all of it looted from the coffers of
Northern China. It's likely that a large portion
of the Mongol elite had invested their treasure
in this expedition and had bet heavily on its
success. For this reason, Chinggis Khan's reputation
among the Mongol lords was also at stake.
During the cooler autumn months, this trade
caravan traveled for several weeks through
Mongolia, across the Altai Mountains, and over
the grasslands and deserts of what is today
Kazakhstan. Finally, in November, they arrived
at the border of what was then the largestMuslim
kingdom in the world, the empire of Khwarazm.
Khwarazm was a relatively new power. Only a century
earlier, it had been a small kingdom centered on
the powerful city of Gurganj in the Khwarazmian
oasis. Here, the lands are watered by the two great
rivers Syr Darya and Amu Darya, which flow down from
the Tian Shan mountains of Kyrgyzstan and
the Pamir mountains north of the Hindu Kush. The
oasis cities along these two rivers, Balkh and Bukhara,
Samarqand and Merv, were enticing stops after the long
weeks on the desert roads, and for centuries they
had swelled with wealth from Silk Road trade. With
these riches they had irrigated their arid lands
until they bloomed and fed vast and thriving
populations. But over the preceding century,
the Turkic rulers of Gurganj had formed a fruitful
partnership with the nomadic people known as the
Kipchaks, and had recently used their powerful
cavalry armies to expand into Turkmenistan and
Afghanistan, and spilled south into the mountains
of Persia. The Khwarazmian Empire was now the largest
and wealthiest Muslim power on the planet. The
Persian scholar Ata-Malik Juvaini records the
beauty of this region. Khwarazma to me is the best of
lands. May its rain-giving clouds never be blown
away. It was the site of the throne of the sultans
of the world. Its corners supported the shoulders of
the great men of the age. Its mansions were
resplendant with every kind of lofty idea,
and its regions and districts were so many
rose gardens; such was the state of that country.
The ruler of the new empire of Khwarazm was
known as the Khwarazm-Shah, and his name was Ala ad-Din
Muhammad. He was a warrior and a conqueror, and
proud of it. He had inherited a powerful kingdom
from his father, and over the last two decades
had expanded its borders even further into a true
empire. Some in his court even flattered him that
he was the new Alexander, that legends of his
conquests would be told for centuries to come.
This flattery made him bold, but also rash and
impulsive. This proud Shah had agreed to receive
the Mongol trade delegation, along with Chinggis
Khan's offer of friendship, as Juzjani recalls. The
Chenggis Khan sent a great number of offerings and
said, “Say unto the Khwarazm-Shah, I am the sovereign
of the sunrise, and thou the sovereign of the
sunset. Let there be between us a firm treaty of
friendship and peace, and let traders and caravans
on both sides come and go.” But when the merchants
arrived in the borderlands of Khwarazm, they ran into
trouble. The first Khwarazmian town they arrived in
was named Otrar. It sat in the middle of an oasis
on the Syr Darya River, and as a crucial junction
of several major roads, it was a quintessential
Silk Road trading town. If you walked its streets
during this time, they would have been heaving
with merchant traffic, sounds of prayer from
the mosques, vendors crying their wares, and the
sounds of camels noisily watering after long
days on the desert roads. But the governor of
Otrar had a foolhardy nature. His name wasInalchuq,
and he was an uncle of the Khwarazm-Shah,
the brother of the Shah's mother, and this
gave him a great deal of power. The Shah
Ala ad-Din Muhammad had a complicated relationship
with his mother, and she had amassed a great deal
of influence at court. Some even whispered that
she was the real power behind the throne, and so,
her brother Inalchuq may have believed he could
do whatever he pleased. When he saw the Mongol
caravan passing through his lands, packed with
gold and fine silks, Inalchuq hungered after their
cargo. Some sources claim that he acted on the
orders of the Shah himself, while others say
that he acted alone, but we know that when the
caravan passed through Otrar, Inalchuq accused
the merchants of being spies. He ordered that they
be arrested immediately and their goods seized. In
the struggle, the merchants were killed, and their
gold and silks and other goods were taken to the
great market town of Bukhara, where they were sold,
and the governor, Inalchuq of Otrar, took his cut.
He had just become a great deal richer, he might
have thought, and what were a bunch of barbarian
horsemen 3,000 km away going to do about it? Ata-Malik
Juvaini describes the magnitude of this man's
mistake. In executing his command, he deprived
these men of their lives and possessions. Nay;
rather, he desolated and laid waste a whole
world. For every drop of their blood, there
would flow a whole river. In retribution for
every hair on their heads, a 100,000 heads
would roll in the dust at every crossroad. In
exchange for every dinar, a thousand were
exacted. Far away in the Mongol heartlands, on the
banks of the Onon River, a storm
was brewing in the court of the Khan.
Chinggis Khan was naturally offended when he
got word of the attack on his merchants,
but he assumed there must have been some mistake.
He sent an envoy of three ambassadors to seek an
audience with the Khwarazm-Shah, and to ask for his
uncle Inalchuq to be handed over for punishment. But
the Khwarazm-Shah, perhaps feeling his mother breathing
down his neck, refused the Khan's demands, and to
make matters worse, he attempted what he must have
hoped would look like a show of strength. When
the Khan's ambassadors came before him, he had one
of them killed on the spot. Then he rounded on the
other two. He ordered that their beards be shaved
and that they be sent back to Mongolia with their
humiliation as an answer to the Khan. When these
ambassadors returned to Mongolia with their
faces shorn and the Shah's words on their lips,
Chinggis Khan's rage was seismic. Just
as he had done before his invasion of China, he
climbed to the top of the sacred mountain Burkan
Khaldun, up through the broken stones and whispering
pine needles, and there with the Mongolian wind
battering around him, asked the god of the Great
Blue Sky what he should do. The Secret History
records what answer he received. These tidings
had such an effect upon the Khan's mind that
the whirlwind of anger flared up with such
a flame that it could be quenched only by
the shedding of blood. In this fever, Chinggis
Khan went up alone to the summit of a hill,
bared his head, turned his face towards the Earth,
and for three days and nights offered up prayer,
saying, “I was not the author of this
trouble. Grant me strength to exact
vengeance.” Thereupon, he descended from the hill,
meditating action, and making ready for war.
In the year 1219, Chinggis Khan gathered a vast
force of warriors. At perhaps as many as 200,000
men, it may have been twice the size the
force that had devastated Jin China. Along with
his usual horde of nomadic horsemen, he brought
powerful new units of Chinese siege engineers,
experts at cracking open city walls with
a variety of ingenious engines, and with
that horde, he marched west. Ahead of him
was a journey of thousands of kilometers,
over deserts and mountains, but steadily
the doom of the Khwarazmian Empire drew near.
Juvaini describes the sight that the governor of Otrar
saw arriving one day in December in a thunderous
cataclysm outside his city walls. He bit the back
of his hand in amazement at the unexpected sight,
for he perceived that the plain had become a
tossing sea of countless hosts and splendid
troops, while the air was full of clamor and
uproar and the neighing of armored horses and
the roaring of mail-clad lions. The air became
blue, the Earth ebony; the sea boiled with the
noise of the drums. With his fingers he pointed to
the army on the plain, a host to which there was no
end. The Khwarazm-Shah had expected the arrival of
the Mongol forces, but he had dramatically
miscalculated the kind of response that
Chinggis Khan would give him. He himself
commanded a force of perhaps 400,000 men,
twice the size of the Mongol armies, and
his cities were among the most fortified in
the world. He was sure that if he shut up his
armies in his great walled fortresses, the
Mongols would soon run out of farms to burn
and sheep herders to rob, and would eventually
go home, but this would not turn out to be the
case. The moment the Mongols arrived, their Chinese
siege engineers began to build their engines. Otrar's
defenses were formidable, but even these didn't
hold out for long. The Persian scholar Juzjani, a
citizen of the Khwarazmian Empire, who would flee to
India after the Mongol invasion, writes about
what happened next. In a short time, they took Otrar.
They put both small and great, young and old, to the
sword, and left not a soul alive. They martyred the
whole of them. The governor of Otrar, Inalchuq, was
taken alive. To punish him for his greed in seizing
the merchant's gold, Chinggis Khan ordered that he
be executed with a cruelly-fitting punishment. He had
a great quantity of silver melted down, reaching
temperatures of nearly 1,000°, and then poured the
searing molten metal into the man's mouth, eyes,
and ears. The city of Otrar was destroyed and its
people slaughtered, its remains a shattered sight
rising from the arid plains in ragged heaps of
fallen stone. But the rage of the Khan had only just
begun. Otrar sat on the Syr Darya River,
which formed the northernmost border
of the Khwarazmian Empire. Several hundred
kilometers to the south, another river, the Amu
Darya, ran almost parallel to it, and on its
banks stood the wealthiest cities of
the region; the booming metropolis of Samarqand
and the scholarly religious heart of Bukhara.
The 10th-century Iranian author, Istakhri, who traveled
in the region, provides a vivid description of its
pleasant landscape. I know no place in it or in
Samarqand itself where if one ascends some elevated
ground, one does not see greenery and a pleasant
place. The land extends eight days’ travel through
unbroken greenery and gardens along both sides of
the river, and beyond these fields is pasture for
flocks. Every town and settlement has a fortress.
It is the most fruitful of all the countries of
Allah. In it are the best trees and fruits. In
every home are gardens, cisterns, and flowing
water. It was on these cities
that Chinggis Khan now set his
sights, but reaching these wealthy cities would
be no easy feat. Between the Mongol armies and
the walls of Samarqand and Bukhara lay more than 500
km of sandy desert known as the Kyzylkum, a name
which means ‘red sands’ in Turkic languages.
This desert was baking hot, and even trade
caravans would skirt around its edges rather
than risk death in the wastes. The citizens of
Bukhara and Samarqand had heard about the arrival
of the Mongols in the north, but they were not
particularly worried. Tribal nomads had raided
along the northern riverlands before, but no
large army could cross the Kyzylkum Desert. But
they had severely underestimated the Mongols.
Chinggis Khan left his two middle sons, Chaghatai
and Ogedei, to finish up the siege of Otrar, with
his eldest son Jochi taking an army north
towards the Aral Sea. Meanwhile, he sent
two small armies southward into the Fergana
Valley, with instructions to hunt down and
kill the Shah Muhammad. But Chinggis Khan
himself, accompanied by his youngest son
Tolui, was determined to do what others had
considered impossible; to cross the Kyzylkum
Desert with 30,000 horses and strike right at
the heart of the empire, the religious center of
Bukhara. The crossing would have been hard. Chinggis
Khan employed local men who knew the hidden paths
through the wastes and the best time of year to
make the journey. In the colder winter months, dew
would sometimes form on the ground in certain
places, and small plants could grow. With this
help, the army successfully made the crossing, and
arrived on the other side on the 7th of February
1220.Ata Malik Juvaini describes the sight that the
citizens of Bukhara saw outside their city walls.
In the morning, Chinggis Khan arrived unexpectedly
before the town. When the inhabitants, unaware,
beheld the surrounding countryside choked with
horsemen and the air black as night with a dust
of cavalry, fright and panic overcame them,
and fear and dread prevailed. His troops
were more numerous than ants or locusts, being
in their multitude beyond estimation or computation.
Detachment after detachment arrived, each like
a billowing sea, and encamped round about the
town. At the sight of this force, the 20,000
or so soldiers stationed at Bukhara lost all
hope of defending their city. When night
fell, they attempted to flee under cover
of darkness, but the Mongols spotted
them and simply chased them down on
the plains. By the light of the moon, the
Mongol horsemen hunted and killed every
single soldier as though chasing deer on
the steppe. The city of Bukhara surrendered
within three days and opened its gates, with only a
determined core of soldiers holed up in its inner
citadel. Intriguingly, it's in this moment that we
have the only purported instance of Chinggis Khan
ever setting foot inside a city. Usually when
it became clear that a settlement was about to
fall to his soldiers, the Khan would leave one of
his generals to loot the place, while he would
return to his camp and his felt-walled tent, his
job done. It's clear he had a powerful distaste
for cities and for anyone who would voluntarily
imprison themselves within their walls and foul-
smelling streets. But when Bukhara opened its great
gate, the Persian sources describe him riding into
its streets. Bukhara was one of the religious centers
of the Muslim world at the time, and its reputation
was known far and wide, but the Khan likely hated
what he saw. We can imagine him wrinkling his
nose at the pungent aromas of the medieval city;
the rats scuttling through the sewers and fish
markets and tanneries, the clouds of flies circling
over rotting midden heaps and dung hills, all of
it so different to the fresh, open grasslands
that he knew and loved. He went straight to the
largest and grandest building, the great mosque
of the city, which was famed across the Muslim
world for its size and opulence. This, he assumed,
must be the house of the king, as Ata-Malik Juvaini
recounts. Chinggis Khan asked those present
whether this were the place of the sultan. They
replied that it was the house of God. Then he, too,
got down from the horse, and mounting two or three
steps of the pulpit, he exclaimed, “The countryside
is empty of food. Fill our horses’ bellies.” The
Mongols brought the cases in which the Korans
were kept out into the courtyard of the mosque,
where they cast the Korans right and left, and
turned the cases into mangers for their horses.
Then Chinggis Khan gathered
the common people of the city in
the great mosque of Bukhara, with the pages
of the Korans still littering the floor.
The people must have been terrified, shaking
with fear, praying, and weeping softly. Then, over
their heads, the Great Khan's voice rang out.
He mounted the pulpit in the festival prayer
space and said, “Oh people, know that you are great
sinners and your leaders are at the head of the
pack in sin. You ask me why I say this; I say
it because I am the scourge of God. If great
sins had not been committed by you, the great
God would not have sent you one like me as a
torment.” We don't know if this event truly
took place as Juvaini describes. He was not
old enough to witness it himself, but may have
heard it secondhand, or perhaps this episode
was an invention of the writer, designed
to make sense of what happened and explain the
destruction of the Mongol invasion in terms
that his Muslim readers could understand, as
a judgment of God. But either way, we know
what happened next. The citizens of Bukhara
were rounded up and driven towards the citadel,
where the Shah's forces were still resisting.
Just as in China, the citizens were forced
to dismantle their own city's defenses, and
their bodies piled up below the walls. Against
this onslaught, the citadel of Bukhara didn't
last long. Chinggis Khan now wielded an army that
combined the strength and mobility of the steppe
warrior with the technological ingenuity of the
Chinese. The combination was terrifying, as Juvaini
describes. On the outside, catapults were
erected, bows bent, and stones and arrows
discharged, and on the inside, ballistas
and pots of naphtha were set in motion. It
was like a red-hot furnace fed from
without by hard sticks, while from the
belly of the furnace, sparks shoot into
the air. For days they fought in this manner.
When the citadel finally fell, Chinggis Khan
ordered the city walls to be demolished utterly,
and all the soldiers inside were slaughtered. But
in return for their speedy surrender, the citizens
of the wider city were spared. Juvaini recallsthe
simple proposition he offered to the Khwarazmian
people. Let the emirs and great ones and the
numerous common people know this; that all the
face of the Earth, from the going up of the sun to
his going down, I have given unto the Khan. Whosoever
shall submit, mercy shall be shown to him and
to his wives and children and household, but
whosoever shall not submit shall perish together
with all his wives and children and kinsmen.
This strategy of calculated leniency and
brutality was ruthlessly effective, but
it could only work if word got around. For
this reason, Chinggis Khan would always allow
refugees to flood into other cities around the
region, filling people's heads with stories of
the vast destruction visited on all who opposed
the Khan, and his mercy to those who bent the knee.
The Arab writer Ibn Al-Athir, living in Mosul
at the time, recounts the effect of these
increasingly outlandish rumors. These Tartars,
may God confound them, came from the east and
wrought deeds which horrify all who hear of
them. Stories have been related to me which the
hearer can scarcely credit as to the terror of the
Tartars, which God Almighty cast into men's heart.
This was one of the most effective
propaganda campaigns in history, and
the strategy paid off. With the siege of
Bukhara completed, Chinggis Khan now swung
around and bore down on the wealthy metropolis of
Samarqand. Samarqand was not just a booming trade hub;
it was also a mighty fortress, and considered by many to
be impregnable. It was defended by a large army,
even including twenty war elephants brought from India,
but at the sight of the Mongol force approaching,
and with refugees in its streets spreading tales
of terror, the army tasked with guarding its walls
simply threw down their spears and surrendered. At
the time of prayer, they opened the gate and
closed the door of resistance. The Mongols
then entered and that day busied themselves with
the destruction of the town and its defenses. The
inhabitants drew their feet beneath the
skirt of security, and the Mongols in no
way molested them. The fall of Samarqand provided
uncountable amounts of loot, and the Mongols
now found themselves the new owners of some
exotic novelties, the twenty Indian war elephants
that the Shah had used in his army. But
Chinggis Khan had little use for these
beasts. The elephant handlers brought their
elephants to Chinggis Khan and demanded elephant
food. He asked them what the elephants had
lived on before they fell into captivity.
They replied, the grass of the plains. When
he heard this, he ordered the elephants
be set free to forage for themselves. They were
accordingly released, and in the end, perished of
hunger. In return for surrendering, the citizens of
Samarqand were spared a massacre, but in other places
that surrendered, the Mongols’ restraint
was misinterpreted as weakness. This was
when things could get ugly. One such
example was the Khwarazmian city of Nishapur.
Nishapur was the largest metropolitan city
on the Silk Road, a vast and wealthy place
in what is today northeastern Iran. It
sat in a fertile plain at the foot of
the Binalud mountain range in a region
known as Khorasan. Juvaini describes its
beauty. If the Earth may be compared to the
heavens, then the lands are like its stars,
and Nishapur among these stars is like the
fair Venus of the skies. What are men doing
in Baghdad and Kufa seeing that Nishapur is
upon the Earth? For if there be a paradise on
the face of the Earth, it is this, and if it is
not a paradise, then there is no paradise at all.
The Mongols arrived at Nishapur in 1221 AD, and at
first, the city took the Khan's deal. It opened its
gates and its treasuries to the Mongols, but then
the Mongol army departed with their riches, and
left behind only a handful of governors to keep
their hold on the city. The citizens of Nishapur
took this withdrawal as a sign that the Mongols
didn't intend to hold it. They soon revolted,
killed the small number of Mongol governors, and
locked their gates. When they got word of this, the
Khan's armies swung back around and laid sieged
the city. Still, its fate was not entirely sealed;
that was until a single arrow flew down from the
city walls and struck one of the Mongol attackers,
killing him. Unfortunately for the
people of Nishapur, he was the husband
of one of Chinggis Khan's daughters, the
Great Khan's son-in-law, a man named
Tokachar. Until the third day they fought
fiercely from the tower of Qara-Qush, and
discharged quarrels and arrows from the
walls and ramparts. By an evil chance
which was to be the bane of all that
people, an arrow was let fly, whereby Tokachar
fell lifeless, the townsmen having made
an end of him without recognizing his person.
The death of a member of the Mongol
royal bloodline was something that Chinggis
Khan took extremely seriously. When the city finally
fell, he called upon on his widowed daughter, and
told her that she would be allowed to decide
the fate of Nishapur. In her grief and rage,
she ordered that the city be utterly destroyed
and every living thing within its walls put to
death. They then drove all the survivors, men and
women, out onto the plain, and in order to avenge
Tokachar, it was commanded that the town should be
laid waste in such a manner that the site
could be plowed upon, and that in the exaction of
vengeance, not even cats and dogs would be left
alive. The destruction of the city was
total, and the vengeance of the Khan
remorseless in its totality. They severed
the heads of the slain from their bodies
and heaped them up in piles, keeping those of
the men separate from those of the women and
children. Abodes and dwelling places were
leveled with the dust. Rose gardens became
furnaces. After the fall of the empire's mostpowerful
fortress of Samarqand, the Khwarazmian Shah truly
began to panic. As his cities fell one by one, the
Shah Ala ad-Din Muhammad turned tail and fled. He
rode from fortress to fortress as the Mongol
armies pursued him, and as he did, he slipped
into a deep depression. Juvaini recounts that he
began to be plagued with nightmares. He began
drinking heavily, and spent all his time in the
pursuit of pleasures. The terror of the last day
was apparent in his condition, and fear and dread
were manifest in his speech. For the remainder
of his life, he constantly applied himself to
the quaffing of cups of purple wine. One night
in his sleep, the sultan saw luminous persons,
their faces scratched, their hair disordered and
disheveled, clad in black robes like mourners,
who smote their heads and made lamentation.
He asked them who they were,
and they replied, “We are Islam.”
Eventually, with his nightmares
and the Mongol horsemen chasing close
behind him, the Shah escaped to the most
remote hideout he could manage. He took
a boat out onto a small island off the
coast of the Caspian Sea, and hid there.
Whenever he halted for a day, the Mongols would
overtake him. The sultan sent for certain emirs
and consulted them. They thought it best for him
to seek asylum in one of the islands of the Sea
of Abaskun. He went to one of these islands, where
he remained for a while, then when the report of
his presence on the island was spread about, he
took the precaution of removing to another island.
Finally, the Mongols captured the Shah's capital of
Gurganj, and his family fell into the hands of Chinggis
Khan. When the dreadful news reached the sultan
and he learned that his small sons had been put
to the sword, that his veiled womanfolk
had been in the clutches of strangers, and
that all of his wedded wives had fallen
into the embraces of other men, his head
grew dizzy. The world grew dark before
his eyes, then was the pain passed remedy
and threatened his very existence, and he
preferred death to life. He writhed in this
anguish and agitation, and bemoaned this calamity
and disaster until he delivered up his soul
to God and was released from the sorrow of his
life and the trickery of the revolving heavens.
Alone on his tiny Island, the Shah of the Khwarazmian
Empire, Ala ad-Din Muhammad, died, possibly of
dysentery, in the year 1220. He was buried wrapped
in a torn white shirt for a shroud. His empire,
now utterly destroyed, passed into the hands
of the Mongols. His eldest son, an accomplished
warrior named Jalal ad-Din, evaded capture and
led a sizable force south in the direction
of India, where he intended to continue his
resistance. But he was finally caught by the
pursuing Mongol force in the autumn of 1221,
and his army was utterly destroyed. Legend has
it that Jalal ad-Din only escaped death by leaping
his horse into the Indus River and swimming for
safety across the rushing torrent of its waters.
The geographer Yaqut al-Hamawi, a citizen of the
city of Merv, who fled the advance of the Mongols,
wrote about the destruction they left in their wake.
Those infidels and heathens roamed through
those abodes, so that palaces were erased off the
Earth as lines of writing are effaced from paper,
and cities became a dwelling for the owl and the
raven. In those places, the screech owls answer
each other. They are filled with sadness. The
Devil himself would bewail the great catastrophe.
It was an event enough to turn gray the hair of
children. The Arab writer Ibn Al-Athir also wrote
with palpable sorrow about the horror of those
days. With one stroke, a world which billowed with
fertility was laid desolate, and the regions
thereof became a desert, and the greater part of
the living, dead, and their skin and bones crumbling
dust, and the mighty were humbled. For some years,
I continued a verse from mentioning this event,
deeming it so horrible that I shrank from
recording it. Oh, would that my mother had not
borne me or that I had died and become a forgotten
thing before this befell. Nay, it is unlikely that
mankind will see the like of this calamity
until the world comes to an end and perishes.
The conquest of the Khwarazmian Empire had
taken four years. It had wiped some of
the world's largest cities off the
map and cost countless lives, and by
the end of it, Chinggis Khan's empire was
the largest that the world had ever seen.
By this time, Chinggis Khan was in his sixties, and he
was beginning to think with increasing trepidation
about his own mortality. During his campaign
in Persia, he invited a Chinese Daoist monk named
Master Chang-chun to visit him in the hopes that
this wise man might have some answer about how a
man could live forever. This holy man's journey
is recorded in a text called The Account of the
Perfect Master Chang-chun's Journey to the West.
In it, he describes his journey over the Mongolian
steppe. On the fifth day of the third month, we
began traveling in a northeasterly direction.
All around us we saw human habitation, nothing but
black carts and white tents, and herders following
the grass and water to pasture their animals.
When we passed out of the marshy plains, there
was not even the smallest tree or shrub. Only
yellow dust clouds and white grasses were in
sight. On his journey, he saw everywhere the
signs of the great war that was unfolding,
and passed by a number of battlefields left
by the passage of the Mongol armies into the
west. The stony gorge on the south
was unbearably alarming. On both
sides, precipices held up the towering sky,
and the chilly surge of a mountain stream
flowed and rolled over the ground. People
covered their noses because of corpses
strewn about the narrow path, but it was the
long-eared donkeys drowned in the stream
that sickened my heart. War has raged
for ten years and over huge distances.
When he finally arrived in Samarqand after months of
travel, he found the city half empty, many of its
inhabitants fled, and its walls and defenses torn
down. In the second month of winter, on the 18th
day, we crossed a large river and reached north of
the city of Samarqand. Before the sultan was defeated,
there were more than 100,000 households in the
city. Since the fall of the city, only one in four
remains. Finally, he reached the court of the Great
Khan. When he arrived, Chinggis Khan had one
question on his mind. Refreshments and drinks were
served, and then the emperor asked, “Now that you
have come all this way, what secret elixir for long
life can you provide me?” But the Daoist master would
disappoint him. The master replied, “There is the way
of good health, but I can give you no elixir for
long life.” His Majesty appreciated the master's
candor, and ordered two tents to be erected to
the east of his residence in which we would stay.
It's clear from this that Chinggis Khan was
beginning to fear that he did not have long left.
A hunting accident also seems to have frightened
him, and brought the question of his mortality to
the forefront of his mind. On the eighth day,
the emperor went hunting in the foothills of
the eastern mountains, and shot at a large boar. His
horse tripped, and he lost control. The boar stood
nearby, not daring to advance, until his entourage
rushed in with another horse. The hunt was called
off, and the emperor returned. When the master heard
about the incident, he went to remonstrate with the
emperor, saying, “Your falling from your horse is a
warning from Heaven.” The emperor responded, saying, “I
have already come to this deep realization.” For
two months thereafter, he did not go out to hunt.
The man who had brought so much death to other
lands now felt its icy hand on his own shoulder.
Chinggis Khan’s concern wasn't just for
his own life. Now, in his sixties, he began to realize
too late that he had not sufficiently prepared
for the inevitable question of his succession.
He would pass on to his heirs the largest land
empire that history would ever know, but when
he looked at his four sons by his Chief Empress
Borte, he found them totally unprepared to take
on such a burden. It's likely that his plan was
a simple one; his empire would be divided into
a kaleidoscope of different provinces, and over
these, three of his sons would rule. But he would
ensure that each held possessions in the other's
lands so that none would be tempted to go to war.
Above these three brothers would sit the fourth
son, who would rule the entire empire in his place
as the Great Khan. The system was well conceived,
but it would depend on the cooperation of every
one of his sons, and for a number of reasons,
that is the one thing that Chinggis Khan did not
have. He had brought his four
sons, Jochi, Chaghatai, Ogedei, and Tolui
with him on the Khwarazmian campaign, and they
had each led armies and fought bravely, but
throughout the war, trouble had been brewing.
Just as he and his half-brother Begter had
once quarreled over fish and rabbits, now his
sons fought over cities and kingdoms.
First, let's take a look at
the character of each of his sons.
The eldest of Chinggis Khan's sons was Jochi,
but his life had been lived under a cloud of
suspicion. He was the son whose name meant ‘guest’,
as though he was simply a visitor who was being
shown courtesy by the rest of the family. He
had been born shortly after Chinggis Khan’s wife
Borte was kidnapped by the Merkit forest people,
and no one could know for sure whether Chinggis
Khan was truly his father. Still, the Khan had
all his life treated Jochi as one of his sons,
and Jochi also had the strongest desire to prove
himself. He was a courageous leader who always
charged right into the heart of the fight.
Whatever the truth of his fatherhood, he had
spent his life living up to the reputation
of his father. But while Chinggis Khan seems
to have set the issue of his parenthood
aside, his other sons couldn't forget it so
readily. Next in line was Chinggis Khan's second
son, Chaghatai. Chaghatai was hot-headed and
proud, and all his life had resented his older
brother, Jochi. When Chinggis Khan looked at Jochi
and Chaghatai, it's hard to imagine that he didn't
see the similarity between himself and his older
brother, Begter, and remember, perhaps now with a
little sadness, how that story had ended, with
Begter lying dead in the long grass of the steppe. All
his life, Chaghatai had felt sure that Jochi was not
his father's son, and he treated his older brother
with contempt. Silently, he feared that the throne
of the Great Khan would be given to his older
brother, in his eyes a usurper and the son of the
Merkit who raped his mother. In hope of mending the
relationship between these two brothers, Chinggis
Khan had given them a joint mission in the lastwar,
to capture the Khwarazm-Shah's capital of Gurganj,
but the plan had been a disaster. The defenders of the
city put up a fearsome resistance that lasted six
months, and the brothers were forced to burn it
down in order to push them back. Since the city
would belong to Jochi once it was captured, Chaghatai
cared little about how much damage was done to
it, whereas Jochi wished to protect its buildings,
even at the cost of Mongol lives. Chinggis Khan had
hoped to capture the jewel of this empire intact,
but now Gurganj was a ruin, and the city would never
regain its former splendor. This episode seems to
have been just another point of bitter contention
between the two brothers, and a warning about
the burning resentments smoldering between them.
The third brother was named Ogedei. He was
charismatic and larger than life, a barrel-
chested man with an unusually large beard for a
Mongol. He had a jovial personality and a love of
feasting and drinking. He was a capable general, but
he did have one overriding weakness; that was his
raging alcoholism. Like many Mongols, Ogedei was
a big drinker, but even by Mongol standards, his
habit went too far. At one point, his older brother
Chaghatai had appointed an official to monitor Ogedei's
drinking, but it was no good. Ogedei evaded his
watcher and drank himself silly regardless. One
common story about him describes how he promised
his brothers that he would half the number
of cups he drank every night, but he simply ordered
a new cup to be made that was twice the size, and
so, his drinking went on. Still, Ogedei was diplomatic
and generous, and as a result, was well liked by
all. The final brother was Tolui. He was the youngest
of the four, a calculating and formidable warrior,
and he had a famed streak of cruelty. During the
conquest of the Khwarazmian Empire, he had been sent to
pacify the region of Khorasan, and passed through
the region dealing out death on a scale that was
unusual even for Mongols. He had been leading the
army responsible for the massacre at Nishapur, and
he repeated the same genocidal violence
at the great cities of Merv and Herat. At these
settlements, he promised the inhabitants that he
would spare them if they surrendered, but unlike
his father, he went back on his word. When they
opened the gates, he ordered that every living
person be put to the sword. Interestingly, Mongol
tradition often held that the youngest son
should inherit his father's property as a kind
of social welfare. It was assumed that by the
time their father died, the older brothers
would have already amassed their own wealth,
whereas the youngest had the most need of an
inheritance. This rule had never been applied
to titles which were supposed to be appointed to
the most worthy candidate, but it must have been
playing on everyone's minds as the question
of the Khan’s succession became ever more
pressing. It was these four sons that Chinggis
Khan summoned to a fateful kuriltai, a meeting
of the clans in 1223 at a region called
Qulan-Bashi in modern Kazakhstan; Jochi, the
man of uncertain fatherhood, Chaghatai,
the hot-headed and embittered would-be
older brother, Ogedei, the stocky wine-
soaked drinker, and Tolui, the cold-hearted
warrior, and in the smoke-filled atmosphere
of his great tent, he told them that there
they would decide who would rule the empire
after he was gone. The Secret History
records that one of his wives, Yesui, urged
him to choose his successor in the following
words. Living beings who are born to this world are
not eternal. When your body, like a great old tree,
will fall down, to whom will you give your people,
which is like tangled hemp? When your body, like the
stone base of a pillar, will collapse, to whom will
you bequeath your people, which is like a flock of
birds? Of your four sons, the heroes whom you have
begotten, which one will you designate as your
successor? But the kuriltai got off to a bad
start. First, Chinggis Khan asked his oldest
son Jochi to speak, and this sign of apparentfavor
enraged his hot-headed younger brother, Chaghatai.
He said, “The eldest of my sons is Jochi. What do you,
Jochi, say? Speak up.” But before Jochi could utter a
sound, Chaghatai said, “Do you mean that you will
appoint Jochi as your successor? How can we let
ourselves be ruled by this bastard son of a Merkit?”
The effect of this pronouncement was explosive.
At these words, Jochi rose, and grabbing Chaghatai
by the collar, said, “I have never been told by
my father, the Khan, that I was different from
my brothers. How can you discriminate against
me? In what skill are you better than I? Only in
your pigheadedness could you possibly exceed
me.” Chinggis Khan watched his sons fighting in
silence. Seeing the flames of the hearth fire
dance in their eyes, perhaps he remembered
the words of his mother Oelun on the day
that he and Qasar had killed their brother, Begter.
Suddenly his great voice boomed out, trembling with
anger. Before you were born, the starry sky was
turning upon itself. The many people of the felt
tents were in turmoil. They fought against each
other. At such time, your mother was abducted. It
was not her wish. It happened at a time when one
man slew another. She was not in love with someone
else. You speak so as to harden the butter of your
mother's affection, so as to sour the milk of that
lady's heart. Were you, too, not born from the same
belly? Were you, too, not issued from a single
womb? These were almost the same words that
his mother Oelun had once used on him, the
same words that the legendary Alan the
Beautiful had said to her quarreling
sons. The brothers were chastened, and perhaps
realizing that they had harmed both of their
own chances, Chaghatai suggested another
candidate that everyone could agree on.
I shall not dispute Jochi's strength, nor shall
I reply to his claims of skill, but it is Ogedei
among us who is steady and reliable. Let us
therefore agree on Ogedei. So he spoke, and at
these words, Chinggis Khan said, “What do you say,
Jochi? Speak up.” Whereupon, Jochi said, “Chaghatai has
just said it; Chaghatai and I shall, in cooperation
with each other, serve the Khan. Let us agree on Ogedei.”
From this moment on, the drunken
but charismatic Ogedei would be
the heir to the Mongol
Empire. After that explosive meeting,
the brothers rode off in all directions,
never to be reunited. The oldest son Jochi was
most wounded by Chinggis Khan's decision, and
would never see his father again. Wearied
by this conflict in his family, the Great
Khan set out back to Mongolia, arriving there
in spring of 1225. Perhaps those who saw him
there felt a change come over him. The life
of the Great Khan was coming to an end.
In the year 1225, Chinggis Khan set out on
what would be his final military campaign. It
would be against the Tanguts of Western Xia, the
Tibetan Buddhists he had already conquered
on his way to Northern China. In the years
since, they had become unreliable allies,
and were beginning to rebel against his
rule. With the Khwarazmian Empire conquered, he
now wanted to punish the Tanguts for
their impudence. He marched into their
lands and laid waste to them, but on this
campaign, while traveling through the hot
deserts of the western regions, Chinggis Khan
fell from his horse, as The Secret History records.
Chinggis Khan, riding his steed named Red Earth
Gray, on the way hunted the many wild asses
of Arbuqa. When the wild asses passed close by
them, his horse took fright. Chinggis Khan fell,
and his body being in great pain,
he halted at Cho’orqat. He spent that
night there, and the following morning, his
wife, Yisui Qatun, said, “Princes and commanders,
consult each other on what to do. The Khan
has spent the night, his body hot with fever.”
The summer heat made the Khan's condition worse,
and so, his men took him up into the nearby
mountains of Liupan, densely forested with Chinese
pine and dragon spruce, just beginning to turn to
their autumn colors. Not long after, the
Great Khan's illness worsened, and he died at the
end of August in the year 1227. The Secret History
of the Mongols records his passing in brief
terms. Chinggis Khan came back, and
in the Year of the Pig, ascended to Heaven.
There is much debate over what exactly
killed Chinggis Khan. There are several outlandish
myths that circulate around the circumstances
of his death. Some more colorful versions fill
his passing with dramatic irony, imagining a Tangut
princess killing and castrating him when he tries
to force her into bed, but most chronicles simply
mention an illness that fell on him suddenly, among
them, the Persian historian Ata-Malik Juvaini.
When Chinggis Khan returned from the lands of
the West to his old incumbent in the East, he
was overcome by an incurable disease arising
from the unpleasantness of the climate. Some modern
scholars have even suggested that he was an early
casualty of the Bubonic plague, which would soon
spread westwards across Eurasia and cause death
and destruction on an unprecedented scale. The
Chinese language source, The History of Yuan or
Yuan Shi, records that on the 18th of August,
the Khan felt unwell with a fever, and eight days
later, he died. Such a rapid pace of decline
could point to the Black Death being the
cause. Whatever the cause of his death,
the Khan's body was soon prepared for
burial. Mongols of this time held a great taboo
around speaking about death, and so, we
actually know little about the deaths
of many of the characters in this story.
Some, like Chinggis Khan's wife Borte,
simply disappear from records altogether, and
we have no information about when or how she
died. As for the Khan, some believe that he was
probably buried close to where his army was
situated, somewhere in Ningxia among the Liupan
mountains, but other sources record a more
dramatic version of events. The Venetian explorer
Marco Polo, who traveled to Mongolia nearly half
a century later, wrote the following account
that was told to him. All the Grand Khans and all
the descendants of Chinggis, their first lord, are
carried to a mountain to be interred. Wherever
so the sovereign may die, he is carried to his
burial in that mountain with his predecessors. No
matter if the place of his death were a 100 days’
journey distant, there must he be carried to his
burial. Mongol religious beliefs held that the
bodies of the dead should never be disturbed.
For this reason, Marco Polo also recounts that
the Mongols were determined that no one should
ever find the grave of the Great Khan, that his
body would forever lie undisturbed, and that
they went to extraordinary lengths to make
sure its location remained a secret. When
they are carrying the body of any emperor to be
buried with the others, the convoy that goes with
the body puts to the sword all whom they fall in
with on the road. They do the same, too, with horses,
for when the emperor dies, they kill all his best
horses in order that he may have the use of them
in the other world, as they believe, and I tell
you as a certain truth that when one Khan died,
more than 20,000 persons who chanced to meet the
body on its way were slain in the manner I have told.
While these accounts may be an exaggeration,
what is sure is that the Mongol soldiers fenced
off a large area of land around the sacred
mountain Burkan Khaldun, marking it with a
fence of arrows stuck in the ground. Other than
the closest royal family of the Khan, no one was
allowed to enter this forbidden zone on
pain of death, with guards permanently
stationed on its perimeter. The later Mongol
historian Saghang Sechen describes the body
of Chinggis Khan being removed to his native
Mongolia on a two-wheeled wagon escorted
by his great army. On the way, one of the
Khan's old friends began to sing a mournful
song. Kiluken Bahadur of the Sunid tribe lifted
up his voice and sang, “Once you did swoop like a
falcon, but now a rumbling wagon trundles you off.
Oh, my king, have you in truth then forsaken your
wife and your children, and the rule of your
people? Oh, my king, circling in pride like an
eagle once you did lead us, oh, my king, but now you
have stumbled and fallen like a wild horse. Oh, my
king. Today it's thought that the most
likely place for the Khan's burial is
in this area, somewhere around the mountain of
Burkan Khaldun, the holy peak that he had always
climbed whenever he needed to hear the voice
of his God and to be close to the great sky
above. Now, between Chinggis Khan and the
Great Blue Sky, there was only silence.
After the death of Chinggis Khan, the Mongol
Empire went into a state of some shock, and
its wars of conquest were largely put on hold,
but the immense respect he had won during his
life carried over into his death, and the plan
he had put in place for his succession was
carried out. For the next two years, the
empire was held in a kind of regency by
his youngest son Tolui, and at the end of that
period, once the time of mourning had passed,
Ogedei took his position as Great Khan on the
13th of September 1229, as The Secret History
records. In accordance with the decree of
Chinggis Khan, they installed Ogedei as Khan.
The night guards, the quiver bearers, and the
8,000 day guards who had been protecting the
precious life of their father Chinggis Khan, the
personal slaves and the 10,000 guards who had
been in close attendance on the person
of his father, the Khan, were all handed over.
In fitting with his character, one of Ogedei's
first acts as Khan was to hold a grand celebration.
At this festival, feasts were held, songs
were sung, and games played, wrestling and
hunting, archery and riding, and of course,
enormous quantities of alcohol would have
been consumed. The airag and black kumis, the
Chinese rice wines and fine Persian grape
wines, would have flowed from silver goblets,
and the revelry would have lasted for days.
Ogedei loved to be liked, and he had always
had a generous streak. To celebrate his coming
to power, he opened his father's treasuries
and distributed gifts and wealth to all the
influential families of the Mongol steppe. This
generosity gained him many friends, but the
Persian scholar Ata-Malik Juvaini recounts his
profligate behavior with a note of disapproval.
He was ever spreading the carpet of merrymaking
and treading the path of excess, in constant
application to wine and the company of angelic
women. Being by nature extravagantly bountiful,
he gave away everything that came in
from the farthest and nearest parts of
the empire without its being registered by
accountant or inspector. No mortal returned
from his presence without his lot or share, and
no petitioner heard from his tongue the word ‘no’.
Ogedei was for the most part a successful ruler,
but he also had a quite different vision for the
Mongol Empire to that of his father. Chinggis
Khan had always maintained his dislike and
distrust of settled peoples and city-dwellers. He
had envisioned his empire as the people of the
felt walls, a pure confederation of nomadic peoples
that would stand up for the pastoralist lifestyle
against the corruptions of the settled world.
But Ogedei had seen the great cities of China and
Persia. He had looked with envious eyes upon the
great walls of Beijing and Samarqand, and had brought
advisers from Northern China to help him rule. One
of these, a Khitan man named Yelu Chucai, is said to
have given Ogedei the following piece of advice.
An empire won on horseback cannot be ruled on
horseback. For this reason, Ogedei now dreamed of
departing from his father's policy and building
a proper capital for the empire he had inherited.
This capital would be complete with all the things
a great city needed; buildings, streets, temples,
workshops, and palaces. He ordered that this new
city be built out in the middle of the steppe, at
the same spot where his father had set up his
main camp, a site where the canyon-like Orkhon River
Valley spills out into the pastures below, right in
the heart of Mongolia. Construction of this city
happened quickly, with architects and craftsmen
being brought primarily from the conquered regions
of China, but Ogedei also brought some Persian builders
to Mongolia to work on his palaces. Ata-Malik
Juvaini gives an account of the new Mongol city.
There had previously been
no town or village in that place,
except for the remains of a wall. The
Khan called caused a town to be built
on it, which they called Ordu-Balig,
though it is better known as Kara-Korum.
Karakorum in Mongolian means black castle
or black stones. The city rose out of the bare
steppe grasslands, with earthwork walls and four
gates, and buildings lined with wooden pillars
built in the Chinese style with swooping pagoda
roofs. At the four corners of the city, he had
four stone tortoises carved, facing out in each
direction. The tortoise was a symbol of stability
and protection, and with their incredibly long
lives had become representations of eternity. These
stone guardians watched over the city and formed
a statement in stone, that Karakorum was built to last.
With the help of his foreign craftsmen, Ogedei
built Karakorum into what he hoped would be a
fitting capital for the world's largest empire, and
a fitting venue for the world's most impressive
parties. Above the town, a garden was built for
the Khan with four gates, and in the midst
of that garden, artisans reared up a castle,
and inside it a throne having three flights
of steps for the Khan alone. The utensils were of
gold and silver and studded with jewels. Twice
in the year would the Khan alight in this
pleasant abode. Whenever the sun entered the
sign of Aries and the world was glad, he would
feast for a month in this residence, and as
the bounty of the rain reaches both herbs and
trees, so both great and small took part in the
feasting. Ogedei encouraged the empire's
elites to build houses near his palace, but
for the most part, Karakorum remained something of
a halfway point between a Mongol camp and a true
city. Much of the Mongol nobility continued
to live in their ger tents, often pitching
them outside the walls, and treated the city as
something of an eccentric novelty. At its heart
was the Central Secretariat, the main civilian
governing body of the empire. This contained a
large body of scribes who assessed tax
registries and tribute, and translated
orders to be sent to the various provinces
of the empire. Other than this administrative
hub and the palaces of the Khan, the city contained
mostly warehouses for the vast treasures looted
from all over Asia, and workshops where captured
craftsmen toiled, as well as various houses of
worship for all the different religions
of the empire. The Flemish monk, William of
Rubruck, who passed through in the middle of the
13th century, was less than impressed with this
imperial capital, and compared it unfavorably
to the small town of St. Denis just north of
Paris. Regarding the city of Karakorum, you should
know that discounting the Khan's palace, it is not
even as fine as the town of St. Denis, and
the monastery of St. Denis is worth ten of
the palace. It contains two quarters; one for
the Saracens, where there are bazaars and where
many traders gather. The other is the quarter of
the Chinese, who are all craftsmen. Set apart from
these quarters lie large palaces belonging
to the court secretaries. There are twelve idol
temples belonging to different peoples, two mosques
where the religion of Muhammad is proclaimed, and
one Christian church at the far end of the town.
The town is enclosed by a mud wall, and has four
gates. But despite its somewhat humble appearance,
Karakorum was an expensive city to maintain.
Sitting out in the middle of the steppe, its land
was not fertile, and its people could grow few
crops. For this reason, it was never self-sufficient,
and its population had to be sustained by food
brought over long distances from crop-growing
regions in Northern China. Ogedei had hoped that
Karakorum would become a trading hub in its own
right, and that its economy would become self-
sustaining. To encourage this, he had trees
planted along the roads that were used by
trade caravans to help shelter them from the
sun and rain, and to show where the roads were
when the steppe was covered in winter snows. Ogedei
also expanded one of the Mongols’ most impressive
achievements; their extensive postal system. This
system, which became known as the Jam in Mongolian
and Yam in Turkic, connected every corner of the
empire with a system of postal stations where
fresh horses and supplies were always kept.
The Venetian explorer Marco Polo described
the remarkable functioning of
this enormous piece of public
infrastructure. From each city proceed many roads
and highways leading to a variety of provinces, one
to one province, another to another, and each road
receives the name of the province to which it
leads. The messengers of the emperor find at every
25 miles of the journey a station which they call
Yam, in which they find all the rooms furnished
with fine beds and all other necessary articles
in rich silk. If even a king were to arrive
at one of these, he would find himself well
lodged. At each of these stations, a full complement
of fresh horses would be kept. When a messenger
approached one of these stations, he would
bang a drum so that the people working there
would know to get his horse ready, and he could
continue his journey with the minimum amount of
delay. At some of these stations, moreover, there
shall be posted some 400 horses standing ready for
the use of the messengers. At others, there shall
be 200. On all these posts taken together, there are
more than 300,000 horses kept up, especially for
the use of the messengers. The thing is on a scale
so wonderful and costly that it is hard to bring
oneself to describe it. The Mongols issued
passports to travelers in the form of tablets
called paiza, made of wood, bronze, silver, or gold,
depending on the rank of the person carrying
it. These conferred status on the traveler, and
allowed them to access the services of the Jam
postal stations. But despite these measures to
bring the vast empire closer together, the
capital of Karakorum was some way off the
main arteries of the Silk Road, and traders saw
little reason to make the long journey out into
the steppe, unless it could be made worth their while.
To encourage them to keep coming to his new city,
Ogedei decreed that they would be paid above the
usual price for their goods, sometimes even
twice as much as they were worth elsewhere. For
a time, this strategy worked, and the merchants
kept coming, but this system was obviously
unsustainable, and soon the money began to run
dry. By the year 1235, six years into Ogedei's rule,
much of the vast wealth that had been amassed
by Chinggis Khan had already been frittered away by
his son. The dream of turning the nomadic empire
of conquest into a settled empire of trade
and commerce was looking ever more unlikely,
and facing a potential bankruptcy in his
future, Ogedei knew that the Mongol Empire
would have to find new sources of gold. The
Mongols would once more go to war.
It's during Ogedei's reign that the Mongol Empire's
ambitions grew from the conquest of its neighbors
and subjugation of other steppe peoples to a much
more expansive vision, a belief that the whole
world had been destined to live under Mongol
rule, and that there was nowhere on Earth that
would escape their conquests. To decide where
the Mongol armies should next descend, Ogedei
summoned another kuriltai, a gathering of
the clans, bringing together the entire family
of Chinggis Khan, their wives and vassals and key
commanders, and here a number of different options
were raised. Some argued that the Mongols should
march south to the lands of India; others that it
was the turn of Southern China and the SongDynasty,
who had watched with such glee as the northern
Jin were destroyed. Others wanted to march into
the Muslim lands and seize the great cities
of Baghdad, Aleppo, and Damascus, but there was one
final option that was raised by the general named
Subedei. He had been one of Chinggis Khan's closest
generals, and was now the last surviving member of
that old guard, something that gave him immense
respect. He suggested that the horde ride west,
and toward a previously unexplored land that sat
on the periphery of the world, a great peninsula
jutting out of the Asian landmass, about which the
Mongols knew little. These were the lands of Europe.
Europe, around the year 1200, was something of
a backwater. It was home to about 70 million
people, but although it produced textiles
and fine metals, compared to other areas
of the world, much of medieval Europe had
low levels of urbanism. Other than the huge
Byzantine capital of Constantinople, Europe had
only a handful of cities that had even 50,000
inhabitants, and even fewer outside of Italy.
Its position, somewhat removed from Silk
Road trading routes, meant that it was not a great
beneficiary of the vast wealth that flowed along
them, and as a result, Europeans were also among
the last to hear news coming out of the east.
For this reason, Europeans also had a somewhat
confused idea of what the world beyond their
borders looked like. It was widely believed
in Europe at the time that a great Christian
king ruled far in the east, a man that they
called Prester John. It was supposed that this
Christian emperor would one day ride west to
help the Christians retake Jerusalem from the
Saracens. When Mongol armies first arrived in
Europe, there was at first some excitement.
This was perhaps the coming of the great Prester
John, but the reality would be quite different. The
late 13th-century Chronicle of Novgorod, one of
the oldest Russian histories, describes the
first arrival of these nomadic horsemen
about 14 years earlier, in the year 1223.
The same year, for our sins, unknown tribes came.
No one exactly knows who they are, nor whence they
came, nor what their language is, nor of what race
they are, nor what their faith is, but they call
them the Tartars. We have heard that they have
captured many countries, slaughtered a quantity
of the godless peoples, and scattered
others. These perplexing foreigners were in fact
a pair of Mongol armies led by the generals
of Chinggis Khan, Subedei and Jebe. They had been
sent to destroy any remains of the Kipchak
people, a large confederation of steppe nomads
who occupied the area of the Volga River, andwho
had fought on the side of the Khwarazmian Empire
just a couple of years earlier. These were some of
the last holdouts among the peoples of the steppe
who had not yet bent the knee to the Mongols.
Now a large force of Kipchak Turks fled west
to Russia and begged the help of the major power
in that region, the settled kingdom of Kievan Rus.
Centered around the city of Kiev in modern
Ukraine, Kievan Rus was less of a kingdom
and more a fractious collection of princely
city states that formed a belt across the
European peninsula, from the Arctic White
Sea in the north to the shores of the Black
Sea in the south, and like the Khwarazmians, its
people had often employed Kipchak nomads as
mercenary cavalry in its armies. When
the Kipchaks fled into Russia, they warned
the Russians in no uncertain terms about
what was coming, as the Novgorod Chronicle
records. To all the Russians they brought many
gifts; horses and camels, buffalos and girls, and
they came saying this: “Our land they have taken
away today, and yours will be taken tomorrow.”
Frightened into action by this warning, the
princes of Kievan Rus put together a grand
coalition and massed a force of 880,000 men
under the command of Grand Prince Mstislav III
of Kiev. Together they marched out
to meet these barbarians. On the way,
they encountered some Mongol envoys, who told
the Grand Prince that they meant him no harm,
that they were only there to destroy
the last remnants of the Kipchaks, who
they contemptuously referred to as their
slaves and horse herders. But the Kievan
ruler would make exactly the same mistake as
the Shah of Khwarazm, as the Chronicle of Novgorod
recalls. The Tartars send envoys to the
Russians saying, “Behold; we hear that you
are coming against us, but we have not
occupied your land, nor your towns, nor
your villages, nor is it against you we have
come. But we have come sent by God against our
rebellious horse herders.” But the Russians did
not listen to this, but killed all the envoys.
Still confident of victory, the Russians advanced
to crush the Mongol invaders. At the sight of the
European army, with its mass of peasant infantry,
supported by colorful columns of heavily-armed
knights, their pennants flying and helmets
gleaming, the Mongols appeared to retreat
in panic. The Russians were encouraged, and so,
they gave chase. They pursued the Mongols for a
whole day, and then another, and then another, but
whenever they thought they were getting close,
their quarry just managed to pull away. They
became perturbed by the almost supernatural
speed and endurance of these foreigners, how they
never seemed to stop or slow down, never seemed
to need supplies, never slept or lit campfires.
Gradually, the Europeans ran out out of steam.
Their horses grew tired, and their footsoldiers,
too. It was at this point that the Mongol trap
swung shut. On the 1st of April 1223, without
warning, a second Mongol army swept out of the
forests and began a massacre on the banks
of the Kalka River, as the Novgorod Chronicle
recalls. There was a terrible and savage
slaughter, and Mstislav, Duke of Kiev, seeing this
evil, set up a stockade of posts about him,
and fought with them for three days, and of
the rest of the troops, only every 10th
returned to his home. A countless number
of people perished, and there was lamentation and
weeping and grief throughout towns and villages.
As the infantry was slaughtered,
the princes of Kiev tried to flee the
battlefield, but they were easily hunted down
by the Mongols. A great part of the kingdom's
aristocracy was wiped out in that single day
of battle. It's recorded that several Kievan
nobles were captured, and as a punishment
for killing the Mongol ambassadors, they
were stuffed under the floorboards of one of
the Mongol tents. All night, the Mongol warriors
feasted and celebrated their victory, their weight
steadily crushing to death the nobles beneath the
floor. Then, with their mission complete,
the Mongols vanished. They had appeared,
wiped out an entire army with ease,
and then disappeared without a trace.
The Novgorod Chronicle records the confusion that
the event sowed. The Tartars turned back from the
river Dnieper, and we know not where they came from,
nor where they hid themselves again. Only God knows
where he fetched them against us for our
sins. To the medieval European mind, the meaning
of this event was clear; it was a punishment from
God. But little did they know that worse was on its
way. It was the winter of 1237, on the frozen
expanse of the Russian steppe, when the first
Mongol horsemen once more appeared
on the edge of Europe, but this time
they came to stay. In his Chronica
Majora, or Great Chronicle, the English
writer Matthew Paris wrote about
these newcomers in terms of utter
condemnation. An immense horde of that
detestable race of Satan, the Tartars, rushed
forth like demons loosed from hell. They are
inhuman and of the nature of beasts,
rather to be called monsters than man,
thirsting after and drinking blood, and
tearing and devouring the flesh of dogs
and human beings. They are invincible in
battle. They have no human laws, know no
mercy, and are crueler than lions or bears.
The Mongols had waited until the winter set
in for their invasion, so that the great rivers
Volga and Dnieper would freeze over, turning
them into a highway for their horses. Moving
fast over the frozen ground, they once more easily
encircled the Russian armies and utterly destroyed
them. It wasn't just the speed of
the invasion that took the Europeans
by surprise. For people in Europe, the technologies
that the Mongols brought with them were so
advanced as to be indistinguishable from magic.
In the city of Ryazan, the citizens were so
terrified by the Mongols’ incendiary weaponry,
the Chinese fire lances, and pots of flaming
naphtha that they hurled from their catapults, that
in the confusion they believed that the Mongols
had brought with them trained dragons from the
east. By 1240, virtually all the major cities of
Russia had fallen to the Mongols. In December,
they rounded on what was then the cultural,
religious, and economic heart of the region, the
great city on the Dnieper, the city of
Kiev. Kiev held out for nine days, during which the
Mongol catapults bombarded it with stones and
flaming projectiles. In terror, its population
flooded towards the great stone Church of the
Tithes that stood on the banks of the
Dnieper River. They were desperate to get
close to the shrine of the Virgin Mary, which
they hoped would protect them, and climbed up
onto the church's roof. But the weight of the
crowd on the roof timbers caused them to
collapse, and many of those sheltering within
the church were crushed. The Mongol army soon
flooded into the city and put its people to
the sword. Of Kiev's 50,000 inhabitants, it's
reported that only 2,000 or so
survived. After the invasion, many Russian
cities fell into ruin, and stone building
stopped for many decades. Economic links
between cities and nearby villages were broken,
and famine spread, as the Novgorod Chronicle
recounts. For what is there to say, or what to
speak of the punishment that came to us from God?
How some of the common people killed the living
and ate them. Others ate horseflesh, dogs, and cats.
Some fed on moss, snails, pine bark, lime bark, lime and
elm tree leaves, and whatever each could think of.
Again, other wicked men began to burn the good
people's houses, where they suspected that there
was grain. Giovanni da Pian del Carpine, the
Pope's envoy to the Mongol Great Khan, traveled
through Kiev a few years later in February
1246, and wrote the following description of the
destruction. When we were journeying through
the land, we came across countless skulls and
bones of dead men lying about on the
ground. Kiev had been a very large and
thickly populated town, but now it has been
reduced almost to nothing, for there are at
the present time scarce 200 houses there,
and the inhabitants are kept in complete
slavery. In some places, it took more than
100 years for Russian cities to rebuild,
but after devastating Russia, Ogedei’s forces were
just getting started. One Mongol army perhaps
50,000 strong headed west through the duchies
of Poland, riding in the direction of Germany
and the Holy Roman Empire, and from there,
all of Western Europe was in their path.
In all the cities of Europe, rumors ran rampant,
and all anyone had to work with was a name; the
Tartars. Some believed that the name must mean
that the Mongols had actually come from Hell
itself, since it reminded them of the name for
the deepest region of the underworld in Greek
mythology, Tartarus. Others thought that the
name reminded them of the Biblical King of
Tarshish, mentioned in the Bible. Others still
thought that the Mongols may have been one
of the lost tribes of Israel, now returned to wreak
havoc on Christendom, perhaps enraged by the theft
of relics from the Holy Land during the Crusades.
The English monk Matthew of Paris was especially
responsible for spreading this idea, and tried
to work his way around the inconvenient fact
that the Mongols didn't appear to speak Hebrew
or seem to be Jewish, as he wrote in his Great
Chronicle. In the time of the government of
Moses, their rebellious hearts were perverted to
an evil way of thinking, so that they followed
after strange gods and unknown customs. Their
heart and language was confused, and their life
changed to that of the cruel and irrational wild
beast. Unable to beat the Mongols on the
battlefield, people instead began to lash
out against the defenseless Jewish communities
in countless European cities, and a wave of deadly
pogroms began. In 1239, a fiery comet passed
by the Earth, seeming to some to be a sign
of God's judgment, and in 1241, the panic only
increased as an eclipse blotted out the sun.
People began to believe that the end of days
might finally have arrived. But the northern
Mongol force headed towards Germany was in
fact just a distraction, a typical Mongol
tactic to attack in multiple places at once,
and in fact, their true goal was a land that
was much more amenable to their lifestyle;
that is the rolling grasslands and river
plains of Hungary, which sat on the edge of the
great steppe behind the wall of the Carpathian
mountains. Hungary, too, had given shelter to Kipchak
Turks fleeing from the Mongols, who had begged for
shelter from the Hungarian King Bela IV. The
Mongols sent King Bela the following message.
I have learned that you keep the Kipchaks, my
slaves, under your protection. I charge you that
you do not make me your enemy on their account,
for it is easier for them to escape than for you.
Since they, having no house and continually on the
move with their tents may possibly escape, but you,
living in houses and possessing fortresses
and cities, how can you flee from my grasp?
For a time, the Hungarian troops managed
to hold off the Mongols on a narrow bridge
on a crossing of the Sajo River, but
their resistance did not last long.
One priest and writer, Thomas of Spalato, wrote an
eye-witness account of the aftermath of the battle.
The dead fell to the right and to the left
like leaves in winter. The slain bodies of
these miserable men were strewn across the whole
route. Blood poured forth like torrents of rain. The
miserable country, stained by the blood of its
sons, was dyed red throughout its length and
breadth. From there, the Mongols poured into the
great Hungarian plain. They wiped out the royal
army and sacked towns and villages, rounding up
huge numbers of skilled people who they took
away with them, drafting others to take part
in their human wave assaults of fortresses,
just as they had in China and Persia, and killing
countless others. The Hungarian King Bela fled
south to the coastal regions of his kingdom
in what is now Croatia, and like the Khwarazm-
Shah, he took a boat out into the Adriatic and took
refuge on an island there. Archaeology paints a
clear picture of the desperation of this time. The
remains of many medieval Hungarian churches can be
found with concentric rings of earthwork defenses,
hurriedly constructed, and the Earth around them
is littered with arrowheads and the bones of the
unfortunate defenders. A great number of
buried coin hoards have also been uncovered from
around this time, as the kingdom's wealthy rushed
to hide their riches from the advancing Mongol
tide. When the Mongols finally withdrew from
Hungary in 1242, a year after they had arrived,
they left behind a devastated land. One Italian
bishop living in Hungary named Roger of Torre
Maggiore, wrote the following description of the
desolation. We climbed a tall tree and
surveyed the land destroyed by the Tartars.
What pain. We began to walk across the waste
and abandoned land that they had destroyed
while retreating. Church towers were our
way signs, and the road they marked for us
was rough. The roads and paths had vanished.
Grass and thorn bushes had taken over.
The Mongols were now on the borders of
both the Holy Roman Empire and the Byzantine
Empire, Europe's two major powers. It
looked as though all of Europe would
now fall just like Northern China and the
Khwarazmian Empire before it. If it had, it's likely
that the entire history of the world would
have gone down another path. If the Mongols
had devastated Florence, Venice, and Milan the
way they had devastated Beijing and Samarqand,
the Renaissance would likely never
have taken place, and the modern world as
we know it would have struggled to be born. But
history again had other plans. One event would
transpire that would save Europe from this
fate; that was the death of the Great Khan Ogedei.
Ogedei had always been a great drinker, but
in recent years his alcoholism had truly got out
of control, partly due to tragedy in his personal
life. His beloved brother Tolui had died a few years
earlier, with some even whispering that Oegedei had
had him poisoned, and his favorite son and heir,
Kochu, had also died fighting in China, a mission
that Ogedei himself had sent him on. From that
point, with grief and guilt seemingly warring inside
him, Ogedei seems to have sunk into a depression. He
withdrew from government, increasingly losing his
appetite for ruling, and all the while, he drank and
drank. On the 11th of December 1241, the Great
Khan Ogedei, the son of Chinggis Khan, died as he
had lived — in a drunken stupor — after
thirteen years of rule, and at the age of 55.
The Secret History contains a note
supposedly written by Ogedei himself,
but almost certainly penned by one of his
successors, in which he notes his failures.
I have sat on the great throne of my
Khan father. I made the nation live with their
soles on the soil and their grip on the ground,
yet although I carried forward on my back the
teaming kingdom, it was an error of mine to be
vanquished by grape wine. This was one of my
errors. With Jochi and Tolui by now all
dead, and Chaghatai dead soon after,
the last surviving son of Chinggis Khan had
passed away. But as a man who had lived every
day in the moment and thought little of the
future, crucially, since the death of his oldest
son, Ogedei had named no successor. There was now
no certainty at all over who would rule the
empire. After his death, all of Ogedei's successors
raised their claims to the throne of the Great
Khan, and even Chinggis Khan's surviving brother
Temuge, now in his seventies, suggested that he should
rule. Suddenly, all plans of advancing further
west into Europe were forgotten. This power
struggle would last for ten years, and for five of
these, the empire was ruled by a woman, the widow
of Ogedei, named Toregene Khan. She performed
all the duties of a Mongol Khan; minting coins,
holding kuriltais, and ensured the succession of
her son, Guyuk. He ruled for a further three years, and
during this time declared his intention to
launch a full-scale invasion of Europe, even
sending a letter demanding submission from the
pope. But his health would deteriorate, and he
died while traveling on the 20th of April 1248.
Europe, once again, was spared, and during this time
of upheaval in the Mongol Empire, the rest of the
world could breathe something of a side of relief.
The struggle over who would
become Khan would eventually
come to an end with the rise of a man named
Mongke. The previous Great Khan Ogedei had seven
sons, but Mongke was not one of them. He was
the oldest son of Tolui, the one brother who had
never been considered for the position of Khan.
We can tell that this was an awkward fact
for Mongke, since one of his first official
acts was to crown his father Tolui as Great
Khan posthumously, thus strengthening his
own legitimacy, and when Mongke came to
the throne in 1251, he is said to have
given a statement that acted as a rebuke
of the ways of his profligate predecessor,
Ogedei. I follow the laws of my ancestors.
I do not imitate other countries’ ways.
This question of what kind of
society the Mongol Empire would be
is one that would resurface again and
again over the coming century. Like his
father before him, Mongke was an accomplished
warrior and had fought as one of the most
prominent generals in the invasion of Russia. He
also had Tolui’s somewhat bloodthirsty and ruthless
streak. To quell any resistance when he came to
power, Mongke purged all members of the nobility
who had supported other claimants to the throne
of the Great Khan, many of whom were his cousins.
More than 300 members of the Mongol aristocracy
were slaughtered. While the Mongols were hardly
shy about spilling blood, this amount of killing
in the upper echelons of Mongol society was
unprecedented. After that, he turned his attention
to further conquests. He gave command of his troops
in Persia to one of his brothers named Hulagu,
and his troops in Northern China to another
brother named Kublai, ordering him to prepare
for an invasion of Southern Song China.
Meanwhile, the Khan Mongke remained back in
the imperial heartland, in his capital of
Karakorum. It was during the reign of Mongke
Khan that the King of France, Louis IX,
sent an ambassador to Mongolia, a Flemish
friar named William of Rubruck. He would write
one of the most fascinating accounts of life in
the Mongol court of Karakorum at this time. After
many months of travel across the steppe of Central
Asia, William of Rubruck arrived at the Mongol capital
late in the year 1253. He was taken to see the Khan,
and gives a rare description of the appearance of
Mongke. The Khan was sitting on a couch, dressed
in a fur which was spotted and very glossy,
like a seal skin. He is snub-nosed, a man of medium
build, and aged about forty-five. William was frustrated
because his interpreter was drinking continually
throughout his meeting with the Khan, and by the
end was thoroughly drunk. By this point, he could
hardly understand what the Mongol ruler was saying.
Nevertheless, the Khan gave them permission to stay
in the city, and William of Rubruck began exploring
the Mongol capital. In this melting pot in the
heart of the empire, he encountered people from
all over Eurasia, including one monk from China
who seems to have had some fun at his expense.
On one occasion, a priest from China was sitting
with me, dressed in cloth of the finest red, and I
asked him where he came by such a color. He told me
how in the east of China there are soaring crags
inhabited by creatures built like human beings
in every respect, except that their knees do not
bend, and they move along in a kind of hopping,
and that they are one cubit tall and covered in
hair. They live in inaccessible caves, and when men
go hunting them, they take the most intoxicating
ale they can brew and make cup-shaped hollows
in the rocks, which they fill with the ale. So,
the hunters lie hidden, and these creatures emerge
from their caves and sample the drink, crying ‘chin
chin’, and it is from this cry that their name
is derived, for they are known as chinchin. Then
they gather round in very great numbers, become
drunk, and fall asleep on the spot. At this point,
the hunters come forward and tie their hands and
feet while they are asleep, and next, they open up
a vein in their necks and extract from each one
three or four drops of blood before letting them
go free. The blood, the priest told me, is of the
greatest value for making purple dye. But
despite his slightly gullible nature, William
explored the city diligently, and there he
was astonished to find a number of other
Europeans living and working in this foreign
land, thousands of kilometers from home. We were
discovered by a woman from Metz in France named
Pascha, who had been captured in Hungary, and she
made us as substantial a meal as she could. She
told us about the unheard of destitution she
had suffered, but now she was well enough off.
She had a young Russian husband by whom
she had three very fine little boys. She told us
that there was also a master goldsmith at Karakorum
called William, originally from Paris, whose surname
is Bucher. This William Bucher had been working
in Hungary when the Mongols swept in from the
steppe, and like many others before him, he had been
rounded up for his skill in metalworking. When he
arrived in Karakorum, the Khan Mongke had soon
recognized his potential, and set him to work
building a remarkable mechanical contraption out
of silver. At the entrance to this great palace,
Master William of Paris has constructed for him a
large tree made of silver, with four silver lions
at its roots, each one containing a conduit pipe
and spewing forth white mare's milk. The branches,
leaves, and fruit of the tree are of silver. There
are four conduits leading into the tree, and over
each one of them lies a gilded serpent with
its tail twined around the trunk. One of the
pipes discharges wine, a second fermented mare's
milk, a third a kind of mead, and a fourth a rich
ale. Each beverage has its own silver vessel
at the foot of the tree, ready to receive it.
The fountain even had a method of announcing to
guests that the drinking had begun,
the perfect centerpiece for a Mongol feast.
Between the four pipes at the top, he made an
angel holding a trumpet, so when drink is required,
a man concealed in its cavity then blows strongly
on the pipe that leads to the angel. The angel
puts the trumpet to its mouth, and the trumpet
gives out a very loud blast. When the stewards
in the chamber hear this, each pours his drink
into the appropriate pipe, and the pipes spurt
it out. By this time, Christianity had
made great inroads at the Mongol court, and many
of the Khan's wives were Christians, but there
were also Muslim, Buddhist, and even Jewish holy
men living in Karakorum, all enjoying the freedom
of religion that made the Mongol realm virtually
unique around the world. The Khan Mongke was curious
about religion, but seems to have courted each
faith without ever converting to one of them. In
order to perhaps settle the matter once and for
all, the Great Khan organized a series of debates,
and invited the friar, William of Rubruck, to take
part. The following day, he sent to me his
secretaries, who said, “Our master is sending us
to you with this message; here you are, Christians,
Saracens, and Buddhists, and each one of you claims
that his religion is superior and that his
writings or books contain more truth. So, he
would like you all to assemble together and hold
a conference, and each one to put his claims in
writing to enable the Khan to learn the truth.”
William accepted, but he soon found out that
the Mongols arranged their intellectual debates
much like their wrestling matches. This would
be a rowdy, boisterous affair, and like Mongol
wrestlers, the debaters were expected to drink
a large cup of alcoholic kumis between
each round. Quickly, the holy men became
drunk. To their surprise and despite their bitter
differences back home, the Muslims and Christians
found themselves largely in agreement on the
broad points, that there was one God, that he was
all powerful, and that heaven awaited them after
death. Together, they argued against the Buddhists,
who believed in many gods with limited powers,
and in reincarnation after death. They argued
over the nature of good and evil, whether
everything in creation is good, and why God allows
bad things to happen. According to William’s
own account, he effortlessly outsmarted his
opponents. But to his disappointment, no one
agreed to convert to Christianity then and
there. Everybody listened without challenging a
single word, but for all that, no one said, “I believe,
and wish to become a Christian.” When
it was over, the Christians and Saracens
alike sang in loud voices, while the Buddhists
remained silent, and after that, everyone drank
heavily. But if William had hoped to convince
the Great Khan, he would be frustrated. For his
part, Mongke Khan remained unconvinced. “We
Mongols,” he said, “believe that there is only one
God, through whom we have life and through whom
we die, and towards him we direct our hearts. But
just as God has given the hand several fingers, so
he has given mankind several paths. To you, God has
given the scriptures, whereas to us he has given
shamans, and we do as they tell us, and live in peace.”
The debates came to an inconclusive
end, and the question over which was the
true religion would go unsettled for another day.
William would leave the Khan's court soon after,
but during his time in Karakorum, he had noticed
some extraordinary measures of personal security
surrounding Mongke and his household. William
himself was even grilled by the Khan's security
services. They searched our legs, chests,
and arms to see whether we had knives
on us. They made the interpreter take off his
belt. We were summoned by the grand secretary
and judge, and they inquired most minutely
whence we came from, why we had come, what
was our business, and this inquiry was
made because it had been reported to
Mongke Khan that 40 assassins had entered
the city under various disguises to kill him.
Mongke Khan had good reason to be worried. That's
because he had become a target for a controversial
Islamic sect known as the Hashashin, a
group who have given us the English word
assassin. The Hashashin occupied perhapsas
many as a hundred remote mountain fortresses
across an area stretching from the Mediterranean
coast to Afghanistan, but they coordinated their
operations from their headquarters, the lofty
Alamut Castle in the Alborz mountain range of
northern Iran. Alamut means eagle's nest, and it
was perched high up on the mountain crags. The
Hashashin had no armies to speak of, no infantry
and no cavalry, but they exercised a formidable
strategic power. That is, they assassinated any
noble, general, or king who stood in their way. One
writer named Benjamin of Tudela wrote an account
of these mysterious killers and their enigmatic
ruler. They call him Sheikh-al-Hashishin. He
is their elder, and upon his command, all
of the men of the mountain come out or
go in. They are believers of the word of
their elder, and everyone everywhere
fears them, because they even kill
kings. Although it's difficult to unpick the
legends from the truth when it comes to this
secretive sect, according to Arab, Persian,
and Chinese sources, the name Hashashin comes
from the group's predilection for the drug
hashish, a concentrated resin of the cannabis
plant. According to legends, young men would be
initiated into the group by smoking hashish, and
under its intoxicating effects, they were shown
the beautiful gardens that the Hashashin kept
in their castles. Marco Polo recounted one version
of these tales. Upon awakening from this
state of lethargy, their senses were struck with all
the delightful objects that have been described,
and each perceived himself surrounded
by lovely damsels. He believed himself
assuredly in paradise, and felt an
unwillingness to relinquish its
delights. When four or five days had thus
been passed, they were carried out of the
garden. The young initiates were
told that they had visited the gardens of
paradise, and would be allowed to return
if they were willing to give their life
for the cause. So long as the supply of
hashish was kept flowing, the group had
an endless reserve of brainwashed young men
willing to do their bidding, as Marco Polo
describes. Animated to enthusiasm by words of
this nature, all went forward to die in his
service. The consequence of this system was
that when any of the neighboring princes or
others gave insult to this chief, they were put
to death by these, his discipled assassins, none
of whom felt terror at the risk of losing theirown
lives, provided they could execute their master’s will.
We don't know if these rumors were true or
just stories made up by the group's enemies. The
word ‘hashishi’ can often mean simply ‘rebel’ or ‘outlaws’,
and their name may have actually been the Arabic
word ‘asasiyyun’, meaning something like ‘the principled
ones’. Regardless of the truth, what is certain is
that the assassins were a thorn in the side
of the mighty Middle Eastern powers like the
Fatimid, Abbasid, and Seljuk empires. Over the course
of nearly two centuries, they killed hundreds of
notable people, including three caliphs and one
Crusader king of Jerusalem, and now they had
set their sights on the Khan of the Mongols. They had
clearly enjoyed the respite that the ten years of
Mongol infighting had brought the world, and
hoped that by killing Mongke, they might bring
about another, and perhaps even that the entire
Mongol entity would simply unravel. In the 1240s,
one Mongol general was even assassinated by this
group, and for Mongke, this was the final straw. In
1253, he ordered his younger brother Hulagu to
march into the west and crush the assassins for
good. Hulagu advanced into Afghanistan, and from
there seized their fortresses one by one. Finally,
he rounded on the eagle's nest castle of Alamut,
high in the snowy mountains of northern Iran.
Ata-Malik Juvaini describes the sight that the
defenders of Alamut saw approaching through the
jagged peaks. And from the direction of Ustundar
there came armies all fire and fury, along steep
roads as crooked as the covenant of the wicked.
And from Alamut, which lay to the left, came
the princes Balaghai and Tutar, with a great body
of men, all clamoring for vengeance with a host
like a mountain of iron. The mountains and
valleys billowed with the great masses of men.
The approach to Alamut was steep and virtually
impregnable, but by now, the Mongol armies
were experts at siege warfare. With their morning
draft, the Mongol army struck the harp of war and
prepared to do battle with mangonels and stones.
They cut down and trimmed for these mangonels
the trees which these people had watered for
many years past, not realizing what purpose they
would serve or what fruit they would ultimately
bear. The castle of Alamut soon
surrendered, and the assassins
were crushed as an independent force. With
this inconvenience safely out of the way,
the Mongols now rounded on the Muslim
Middle East and its great capital of Baghdad.
Baghdad at this time was a grand city. It
was the center of the Abbasid Caliphate throughout
the Islamic Golden Age of the 9th and 10th
centuries, growing to be the largest city
worldwide by the beginning of the 10th century,
and though at this point it had suffered some
centuries of decline, it was still the beating
heart of the Muslim world. It was a city of cabarets
and taverns, places where backgammon and chess were
played. On street corners, acrobats performed, and
storytellers spun tales for their audiences like
those later found in the Arabian Nights. The city
also had formidable defenses, with a high and
thick wall. Each of its four gates had double
doors that were made of iron, so heavy that it took
several men to open and close them. The caliphate
was ruled by the caliph, who was the supreme
religious figure cross the Muslim world,
somewhere between an emperor and a pope. Until that
point, relations with the caliph in Baghdad, a man
named Al-Mustasim, had been relatively friendly,
but the Mongols had asked him for soldiers to
help them fight the assassins, and perhaps fearing
that their daggers might be turned against him, he
ignored the Mongol request. This disrespect
was enough for the Khan Mongke to order his younger
brother Hulagu to march down into the lowlands
of Mesopotamia and destroy the caliphate entirely.
The Mongols gathered a huge
force, including a thousand Chinese
siege engineers, and swept into the
plains of Mesopotamia in the year 1257.
Hulagu sent a letter to the caliph Al-Mustasim,
urging him to surrender in ferocious terms.
I will bring you crashing down from the summit of
the sky. Like a lion, I will throw you down to the
lowest depths. I will not leave a single person
alive in your country. I will turn your city, lands,
and empire into flames. If you have the heart to
save your head and your ancient family, listen
carefully to my advice. If you refuse to accept
it, I will show you the meaning of the will of
God. But the caliph Al-Mustasim did not listen.
The Mongols arrived at the capital of Baghdad in
January of 1258. The 9th-century writer Al-Jahiz
wrote the following description of the sight
that the Mongol soldiers would have seen as
they approached across the broad floodplain
of the rushing river Tigris. I have seen such
cities in the district of Syria, in Byzantine
territory, and in other provinces, but I have
never seen a city of greater height or possessing
more spacious gates, or more perfect defenses than
Baghdad. The Mongols settled in for a siege,
and built a rampart completely surrounding
the city. They constructed their vast mangonels
and other siege engines, and began to bombard
the city with their terrifying gunpowder weapons
and incendiary pots of naphtha, brought all the way
from China. But once these ran out, the Mongols
realized that they had a problem. The valley of
the Tigris and Euphrates is essentially a vast
salt flat, and contains virtually no stone. So,
they had no projectiles for their catapults. Faced
with this problem, they would have to be creative.
The Mongols began to cut down the heavy date
palms that grew everywhere along the riverbank,
and loaded pieces of their heavy trunks into
their catapults. The citizens of Baghdad would
soon face the sight of their own date trees
being hurled over enormous distances into the
city. Mongol siege engines broke through Baghdad's
defenses within just a few days, and the assault
on the walls began in late January. By February
the 4th, Hulagu's elite forces had seized control
of the eastern wall. In a growing state of
desperation, the caliph Al-Mustasim made
frantic attempts to negotiate, but Hulagu refused,
even executing the caliph’s soldiers who tried to
surrender. The caliph ultimately capitulated
on February the 10th, and the Mongols captured
him and began to sack the city. The Hawadit Al-Gamia,
written by an anonymous eyewitness, records the
scenes of carnage. The inhabitants
of Baghdad were put under the sword on Monday,
and were subjected to forty days of continuous
killing, pillaging, and enslavement. A great part
of the city, including the caliph’s mosque and its
surrounding, were burnt, and the city was laid in
ruins. The dead lay as mounds in the streets and
the markets. Rain fell on them. Horses trampled
down upon them. Their faces were disfigured,
and they became an example to anyone who saw
them. Some among the city's populations
were spared. The Xia Muslims in the city,
as well as Baghdad's Jewish population, avoided
the worst of the massacre. The city's Christian
community was also spared, since the Mongol
general Hulagu's wife was a Christian, and asked
her husband to show them mercy. Many of the
glorious libraries of Baghdad were destroyed,
and the books within them likely burned up
in the fires that engulfed the city. Some later
sources like Qutb ad-Din an-Nahrawali, writing around
300 years later, embellished the story with the poetic
flourish that the river Tigris had turned
black with the ink of the books thrown into it.
After the slaughter was done, Hulagu held a
victory feast, where he had the caliph brought
to him in chains. The chronicler Nasir ad-Din
at-Tusi, who may have been present as
an eyewitness, recorded the words of the Mongol
general. Hulagu set a golden tray before the caliph
and said, “Eat.” “It is not edible,” said the caliph. “Then
why did you keep it?” asked the Khan, “and not give
it to your soldiers? And why did you not make
these iron doors into arrowheads and come to
the bank of the river so that I might not have
been able to cross it?” “Such,” replied the caliph,
“was God's will.” “What will befall
you,” said the Khan, “is also God's will.”
The caliph was rolled up in
a carpet and trampled to death by
horses, in accordance with the Mongol
requirements that royal blood not be
spilled. The sack of Baghdad tore the
heart out of the Muslim world, and
ended the 500-year rule of the Abbasid Caliphate,
but the Mongol armies were just getting
started. Hulagu arrived at the Syrian city of
Aleppo in December 1259, and after a siege of
seven days, stormed it and massacred its population.
The sultan of Syria, An-Nasir Yusuf, was still at
large, and when the news of the sack of Aleppo
reached him, he and his army fled south. The
Mongols followed hot on his heels, and captured
Damascus sixteen days after they had taken Aleppo.
The Mongols followed the sultan down the shores of
the Mediterranean, and forged through Palestine up
to the border of Egypt. They finally tracked down
the Syrian sultan An-Nasir Yusuf at the port town of
Gaza, and later had him killed. Now, on the border of
Egypt, Hulagu sent ambassadors to the sultan there,
a man named Qutuz, demanding that he swear loyalty to
the Mongol Empire. The Egyptian sultan responded by
having the men beheaded and displaying their
heads on Cairo's Bab Zuweila gate. It was an act
virtually guaranteed to lead to a Mongol invasion,
and soon, perhaps the land of the pyramids might
have also been added to the vast stretch of the
Mongol Empire. But that was not to be the case.
That's because news soon came down the Silk Road
of another seismic shock that would send tremors
throughout the Mongol world; that was the death
on the 11th of August 1259, of the Great Khan Mongke.
For years now, the Khan Mongke had been concerned
with how poorly the war in China was going.
News of his brother Hulagu's glorious victories
in Persia and Mesopotamia trickled back to him
in Mongolia; the destruction of the assassins,
the seizing of Alamut, the sack of Baghdad. But
meanwhile, the news from China was one of slow,
grinding progress. The Khan’s other brother, Kublai,
who had been left in charge of the final
conquest of Song China, could give him only
excuses. The Song Chinese had by now spent
decades hardening their border on the
Yangtse River against the Mongol invasion that
they knew would come, and their fortifications
were formidable. Kublai was not a seasoned
warrior like his other brothers. He had a
much better head for administration and finance.
In fact, he had spent much of his life feasting
in a luxurious estate in Northern China, a kind
of quasi capital that would be called Shangdu,
and has been rendered into English as Xanadu.
Eventually, the Khan Mongke announced that he would
leave Mongolia and travel to China to take
charge of the war himself. In the steppe capital
of Karakorum, he left his youngest brother in
charge, a man named Ariq Boke. Mongke took charge
of an army and marched south. His final documented
presence was during the siege of Diaoyu Castle,
near present-day Chongqing in southwestern China.
Later Chinese sources claim that he was killed
during an assault on the fortress, either by a
crossbow bolt or a flying stone from a cannon
or catapult, but more reliable sources such as
Rashid-ad-din record that he simply died of a
disease. Due to the climate there, an
epidemic of dysentery broke out. Cholera
spread among the Mongol soldiers, and
many of them died. The monarch of the
world drank wine to ward off the cholera, and
he continued so to do. Suddenly, he developed
an indisposition, and his illness came to a
crisis. He soon passed away at the foot of
the unlucky fortress. He was 52 years old,
and this was the seventh year of his reign.
However he died, the death of Mongke
in 1259 would mark a watershed in the
history of the Mongols. This was the
maximum extent of their territory, and
the last time that the entire Mongol
Empire would ever fight as one force.
After the deaths of previous Khans, members of
the royal family had mostly rushed back to
Mongolia to help elect a new overlord in a
grand kuriltai, but this time, none of them
moved. They decided to stay where they were and
claim their own territory. Now the vast swathe of
Asia that the Mongols had conquered fractured
into what were essentially four distinct empires.
Firstly in Persia and the Middle East,
Mongke's brother Hulagu declared himself
the ruler or Ilkhan of the territory he
had spent years conquering, which now
stretched from Afghanistan to Turkey.
It would become known as the Ilkhanate.
Second was in the northwest, in the
steppe bordering Europe in Ukraine and Russia, and
stretching across the Volga region to the Ural
and Caucasus mountains. These lands were held by
Khans descended from Chinggis Khan's oldest son Jochi,
the guest, who had fought all his life to prove
himself to his father. They would call themselves
the Ulus of Jochi, but later historians would give
them the name the Golden Horde. Their rulers would
be among the first of the Mongols to convert to
Islam. Third was in the center of the empire, in the
conquered Silk Road regions that had once been the
Khwarazmian Empire and the vast steppe of Kazakhstan and
Siberia. Here, the descendants of Chaghatai ruled
what became known as the Chaghatai
Kharnate, presiding over the cities
of Samarqand and Bukhara, which had by
now recovered somewhat from the
destruction of Chinggis Khan, and once more
brought healthy income to their rulers.
But it was in the east that the heir
to the throne of the Great Khan rose. He was
the second son of Tolui and the late Mongke Khan's
brother, the somewhat unlikely new emperor, Kublai.
Kublai was born on September
the 23rd 1215, the same year that Chinggis Khan
had sacked Beijing, and for his entire life, the
Mongol Empire had been at war in China. As an
adult, he had been awarded a Chinese estate with
10,000 households, and since then had divided his
time between China and the Mongolian steppe.
Kublai had a liking for the trappings of
settled society, the silks and the finery. He was
advised by Chinese advisers, and even a Buddhist
monk who converted him to Tibetan Buddhism and
taught him to speak Chinese in a rudimentary
way. Already, the people back in Mongolia may have
begun to whisper that Kublai was more Chinese than
Mongolian. When his brother Mongke came to the
throne as Great Khan, Kublai was made viceroy
over part of Northern China, and set about building
an opulent palace at Shangdu, and he was made one
of the commanders of the final assault on the
last bastion of Chinese culture, the southern Song
Dynasty. But much to the frustration of his
older brother Mongke Khan, the conquest of
the Song was a long and difficult campaign.
In the Song, the Mongols faced without doubt
the most technologically advanced army
on Earth. The Song pelted Mongol armies
with repeating crossbows, launched huge
gunpowder bombs from their catapults, and
even filled their explosives with pieces
of broken pottery to create perhaps the
first shrapnel bombs in history. Rashid
ad-Din paints a picture of this grinding
campaign. The roads were difficult and
the places and castles hard to capture.
They had repeatedly given battle, and
entry and exit had been made difficult
for them. Moreover, on account of the unhealthy
climate, many of that army had fallen sick and
died. Still, the momentum of Mongol advance was by
this point unstoppable. Despite heavy losses,
they pushed steadily into the heartlands of
the Song. That was until Kublai heard news that
his brother Mongke had died, and the throne of
the Great Khan was up for grabs. Kublai had
long dreamed of taking that throne for himself,
and as Mongke's brother, he was a prime candidate.
But he was at a distinct disadvantage. Having
spent so many years in China, he had become
distant from the life of the imperial court.
Meanwhile, his main rival was the man that
Mongke had left in charge back in Karakorum, their
youngest brother, the fourth son of Tolui, Ariq Boke.
While his brothers Hulagu and Kublai were
away fighting in distant corners of the empire,
Ariq Boke had been back in the capital living the
life of a true steppe Mongol; hunting and riding, and
supervising the administration of Mongke Khan's
empire, and he had been making friends. He was
a skilled politician, and over his years
in Karakorum had come to gain the support
of the majority of Mongol nobility, including
most of Mongke Khan's own family. It's possible
that people may have hoped that under
his rule, the empire would remain an empire of
the steppe for all the people of the felt walls,
and would not, like Kublai, be seduced by the
ways of the settled societies it had conquered.
When the Great Khan Mongke died, Ariq Boke knew
that his time was short. The chronicler Rashid
ad-Din recalls how he plotted to seize the throne.
No sooner had Ariq Boke heard the news
of his brother's death than his eyes fell
upon the imperial throne, and his courtiers and
retainers also urged him to seize it. But it's
worth remembering that Rashid ad-Din was writing
on behalf of the Mongol court in Persia, who
were Kublai's allies, and in fact, all evidence
points to the fact that Ariq Boke was Mongke's
preferred successor, and that it was Kublai and
not him who was attempting to seize the throne
in a coup. To Ariq Boke's anger, he soon got news
that Kublai, still in China, had held a kuriltai of
his own in 1260 in his summer palace at Shangdu, and
announced his counter-claim to the throne of the
Great Khan. This action was by all Mongol standards
illegal. It was not held in Mongolia, as was proper.
None of the royal family was in attendance, and to
make matters worse, it was done with some of the
trappings of Chinese ceremony. In virtually every
way, it was an affront. Blindsided, Ariq Boke rushed
to announce a kuriltai in Mongolia, and at that
gathering, he declared himself the new Great Khan.
In response, Kublai gathered his armies and marched
north. The Mongol Empire was now at war with
itself. In the west, Hulagu's Ilkhanate backed
his brother Kublai's claim, and went to war with the
Golden Horde and the Chaghatai Kharnate, who backed
Ariq Boke, and meanwhile, Kublai gathered all
his forces and marched into Mongolia. With
him, he brought all the might of northern
China. Unfortunately for Ariq Boke, his
skill as a politician did not translate
into strategic thinking. Although he sat at the
political heart of the empire, his military
position was vulnerable. Karakorum had no
natural defenses other than the Mongolian
steppe around it, and no one who built it
ever imagined it having to withstand a
siege. The city had little agriculture of itsown,
and for the last thirty years had needed to be
supplied with food and other necessities along
sprawling supply routes, as Rashid ad-Din recounts.
It was customary for food and drink to be
brought to Karakorum from China by cart.
Kublai cut off the supply, and this resulted in
shortages and severe inflation. Ariq Boke was
helpless. Ariq Boke recognized the precarity
of his position, and at his brother's advance
in 1261, he fled the capital for the northern
steppe. Kublai swept into Karakorum and looted
the city that his uncle Ogedei had built,
as though it were any other conquest. He
stripped it of much of its wealth and sent
this back to his palace at Shangdu in China.
It's likely that the silver tree of Karakorum,
built by the French silversmith William Boucher,
was also seized and possibly melted down
for transport. Treasure carts rolled back
over the Gobi Desert, laden with precious things,
now heading in the opposite direction. Only fifty
years after Chinggis Khan's conquest of the
Jin Dynasty, China's wealth was coming home.
Ariq Boke spent the next few years being chased
from place to place, trying to gather support on
the steppe, but his weakness in the face of his
brother's advance had destroyed any respect
that anyone held for him. At times, it seemed
like even the weather had turned against him,
as Rashid ad-Din records. One day, Ariq Boke was
busy reveling and carousing, when suddenly a fierce
wind came and tore out the stakes and broke
the poles of his court tent, resulting in the
injury of several people. The court ministers
and commanders took this as an omen of his
demise, and totally abandoned him. Ariq Boke was
left there with only a few soldiers, and he was
dumbfounded. The outcome was soon clear. In 1264,
four years into the civil war, Ariq Boke traveled to
Kublai's palace at Shangdu to formally surrender
in tears to his brother. Kublai is recorded to
have also wept as he received his surrender. Ariq
Boke was imprisoned, and died a year later while
still in captivity, possibly from poison. Kublai
now ascended the throne, and was confirmed as
Great Khan in another grand kuriltai, but there
were some notable absences at this event. None
of the Khans of the other sides of the empire
attended. Now the Mongol Empire was officially
divided, and turned its strength not against its
enemies, but against itself. The late 13th-century
Syrian historian, Ibn Wasil, recounts the
solemn words of one Mongol general. Mongols
are now killed by Mongol swords. If we were
united, then we would have conquered all of the
world. If Chinggis Khan had been alive,
doubtless he would have reminded his
grandsons of the story his mother Oelun
had told him, of Alan the fair and her
sons, and the arrows that united could
not be broken. But divided, each would
snap one by one. In the coming decades and
centuries, this is exactly what would happen.
Despite ruling over a now much-reduced empire,
Kublai Khan still commanded a vast territory. At
as much as 14 million square km, it was 50%
larger than modern China, encompassing the
fertile central plains and a large stretch
of the steppe of Mongolia and Eastern Russia,
and he was determined to build a power base
there that would last, and that would perhaps
allow him to reconquer the other quadrants of his
grandfather's domain. But to do that, he would have
to adopt the trappings of power that his Chinese
subjects understood, according to their traditions.
To this end, in 1271, Kublai Khan formerly claimed the
Mandate of Heaven and crowned himself emperor of
China. The following year of 1272 would be the
first year of a new dynasty, which he would call
the Great Yuan, a word which means either beginning
or center. In accordance with Chinese tradition, his
courtiers begged him to take the title of
emperor, and he modestly refused twice, only
accepting the third time they asked. A Chinese
emperor needed an imperial capital, and Kublai
decided to move his from the site of Shangdu, and
build a new one near the ruined city of Beijing
that his grandfather had destroyed. There,
he would build the new city of Dadu, meaning great
capital, but his Mongolian and Turkic subjects
would often refer to it as Khanbaliq, which in
Mongolian means ‘the city of the Khan’. Rashid ad-Din
recalls his decision. He designated as his winter
residence the city of Khanbaliq, which had been an
imperial capital. It had been chosen as a site
in ancient times by astrologers and philosophers,
and it was considered to be very auspicious and
lucky. Since Genghis Khan had destroyed it, Kublai
Khan wanted to rebuild it, so for his own fame and
reputation, he built another city next to it.
Inside the city he built a truly magnificent
palace for his ordu. Its pillars and paving are all
of marble. It was to this capital of Khanbaliq that
a weary traveler arrived from the other side of
the world, probably sometime around the year 1271.
He had left his home at the age of sixteen or
seventeen, and set out on a journey of exploration
with his brother that had taken him
across Central Asia and through many
of the lands that now belonged to the
Mongol Khanates. His name was Marco Polo.
It was likely the unification of much
of Asia under the Mongols that allowed Polo to
conduct his journey, since the strict enforcement
of the Mongol yassa law code had kept banditry and
robbery to a minimum. This was the period that
has been called the Pax Mongolica, or the Mongol
Peace, when it was said with some exaggeration
that even a maiden carrying a nugget of
gold on her head could wander safely across the
realm without being robbed. When Polo arrived in
Khanbaliq, he was given an audience with the
Great Khan, which he describes in his later work.
I shall tell you of the great
and wonderful magnificence of the
Great Khan now reigning, by name Kublai Khan. He
is the most powerful man as regards forces
and lands and treasure, that exists in the
world or ever have existed from the time
of our First Father Adam until this day.
He is of a good stature, neither tall nor
short, but of a middle height. He has a becoming
amount of flesh, and is very shapely in all his
limbs. His complexion is white and red, the
eyes black and fine, the nose well-formed.
He also describes the opulence of the Khan's
palace. The Hall of the Palace is so large that
it could easily dine 6,000 people, and it is quite
a marvel to see how many rooms there are besides.
The outside of the roof also is all colored
with vermilion and yellow and green and blue
and other hues, which are fixed with a varnish so
fine and exquisite that they shine like crystal,
and lend a resplendent luster to the palace, as
seen for a great way round. Marco Polo
was also astonished to see the Chinese invention
of paper money being circulated by the Imperial
mint, a concept that he struggled to understand. He
makes them take of the bark of the mulberry tree,
and this they make into something resembling
sheets of paper. When these sheets have been
prepared, they are cut up into pieces of
different sizes. The smallest of these
is worth a half silver coin; the next, a little
larger, a whole silver coin; one, a little larger
still, is worth half a silver groat of Venice. All
these pieces of paper are issued with as much
solemnity and authority as if they were of pure
gold or silver, and on every piece a variety
of officials whose duty it is, have to write their
names and put their seals. Anyone forging it would
be punished with death, and the Khan causes
every year to be made such a vast quantity
of this money, which costs him nothing, that it
must equal in amount all the treasures in the
world. According to Marco Polo, Kublai Khan was
so impressed with his adventurous spirit
and command of four different languages, that
he appointed him an ambassador. Over the next
seventeen years, Polo claims to have conducted a
large number of ambassadorial journeys for
Kublai, visiting the far south of China,
Burma, and other lands around southeast
Asia, before finally being allowed
to return home through Mesopotamia.
Back home, the Venetian Marco Polo was taken
as a prisoner of war by the rival Genoise,
and imprisoned for a year in Genoa. During his
imprisonment, Polo shared a cell with a writer
named Rustichello da Pisa. Throughout their time
imprisoned together, Polo recounted his extensive travels
through Asia to Rustichello, who transcribed them into
a work that they called The Description of the
World, but it would become known as The Travels of
Marco Polo, one of the most famous and influential
travel books in history. Polo's work, published
in a dialect of Italian, caused a sensation back
home, and after being translated into Latin, it
was published around all of Europe continuously
for the next centuries. But one detail from Marco
Polo's journey does stand out. When he finally got
permission to leave China and return home in 1292,
nearly twenty years after leaving home, he returned not
over land, but by boat. That's because the Pax
Mongolica, the Mongol Peace that had brought
stability to Asia and allowed his journey in the
first place, was already beginning to fracture.
Despite the glowing impression that the empire
left on Marco Polo, China under Kublai Khan's Yuan
Dynasty was a troubled place. For one thing, it was
still at war with the remnants of the southern
Song, who held out in several strongholds for many
years. But by the 19th of March 1279, the Mongols
had cornered the last child emperor of the Song
in a coastal fortress called Yamen, at the mouth
of the Pearl River. The boy was only six or seven
years of age, but he was the final hope for the
continuation of the Song line. When Mongol forces
finally closed in and it became clear that all
was lost, one of the young emperor's attendants
took the boy in his arms and gave the following
cry. The affairs of the nation lie
in ruin, and our country is destroyed.
There is no hope now. His Majesty has
no alternative but to die for the country.
With the boy in his arms, he leapt from the
cliffs into the ocean. It’s said that hundreds of the
royal family and attendants followed the young
emperor to his watery grave rather than face the
Mongols. The sorrow of the collapse of
the Song Dynasty would haunt the Chinese
people for generations. The poet Hsieh Ao
captured the sense of melancholy when
he visited the ruins of the former Imperial
Palace at Hangchow, and memorialized it in a
poem. Like an ancient ruin, the grass
grows high. Gone are the guards and
the gatekeepers. Fallen towers
and crumbling palaces desolate
my soul. Under the eaves of the long-ago
hall fly in and out the swallows, but within,
silence. The destruction of the Song was
something that many of the Chinese citizens
of the Yuan Dynasty would never forget, and
for some, it was a wound that they would never
forgive. With the south of China finally
crushed, Kublai Khan was the first foreign invader
to ever conquer the whole of the central plains
of China. This was also the first time that the
land had been united since the Tang Dynasty 400
years earlier. But Kublai had won an empire
now devastated by decades of war. The north
of China had been suffering from famine ever
since it was first occupied by the Mongols. Its
agriculture had always been weaker than the south,
where the humid weather meant that rice could
be grown, but in the north the major crops were
wheat, sorghum, and millet. Since the destruction
of Chinggis Khan's initial invasion, the northern
economy had recovered somewhat, but famine was
an ever-present threat. To remedy this, Kublai Khan
ordered the lengthening of the so-called Grand
Canal so that it now connected his new capital
of Khanbaliq with the old Song capital of Hangzhou,
a symbol of national reunification that also allowed
the transport of rice from the south to the famine-
struck north. This measure improved matters, and
for a time, a level of stability came to the
once divided land. But already, the Mongols were
finding that conquering a vast and complex kingdom
like China was much easier than actually ruling it.
The new hybrid empire of Mongolian China
was also going through a crisis of identity.
Kublai's government was a tiny Mongol minority ruling
over a vast population of tens of millions of Han
Chinese, and they were steadily losing their
military advantage. Most of his soldiers were
now no longer Mongolian horsemen, but Chinese
footsoldiers. The old capital of Karakorum, far
out in the steppe, had become an irrelevance,
its palaces stripped of their treasures,
and what wealth it once had taken back
to China. People back in Mongolia must
have begun to wonder who it
was that had actually been
conquered. To ensure that the empire maintained its
Mongol identity, Kublai was keen to keep all the
higher echelons of power reserved for Mongols. To
this end, southern Chinese people of the former Song
were relegated to fourth-class citizens in their
own country, with the northern Chinese above them,
the central Asians and Tanguts above them both, and
of course Mongols as the empire's elite class. Han
Chinese were forbidden from holding many of the
most powerful positions or holding key roles in
the civil service. That meant that many of the
people who were most familiar with the land and
the workings of its administration were kept away
from any positions where they might do some good.
Increasingly, Kublai feared that he might lose a grip
on this slippery empire, and so, he decided to do
what Mongols had always done when they wanted to
unite people around them; they went to war.
First, he was determined to conquer the kingdom
of Dai Viet in the south, the northern kingdom of
what is Vietnam today, but these plans would be
frustrated. Although he swept south in three major
invasions and managed to capture the Vietnamese
capital of Thang Long, near modern Hanoi, the Mongol
forces found the humid tropical weather and
thick jungle landscape impossible to contend with.
The Vietnamese soldiers melted away into the
matted vegetation, and raided Mongol armies with
hit-and-run tactics that slowly whittled away their
strength, as the history of Yuan describes. Although
the Viet were defeated many times, they gathered
more and more troops. Without sufficient supplies,
both our generals and troops suffered hardships
and many of them were killed. In that land,
the troops and horses of the Mongols could
not manifest their talent, too. Eventually, they
had to abandon the capital, crossing the river
toward the north side to discuss the plan of
retreat. While they were never actually defeated
in battle, the Mongols eventually withdrew after
taking heavy losses, leaving the kingdom of
Dai Viet still independent, if somewhat devastated.
These tactics of guerrilla warfare were so
successful for the medieval Vietnamese that
the generals who had masterminded them became
national heroes, and the books on strategy that
they wrote would be read for centuries to come.
As a result, the same tactics would be used again
in the 20th century, when they would inspire the
North Vietnamese army and the irregular forces
of the Vietcong when they once again faced a
more powerful invader in the form of the United
States. For his part, Kublai Khan was
angered by these failed invasions,
and even had one of his own sons
named Toqan banished for his part
in the disaster. With this embarrassment no
doubt stinging, Kublai planned an invasion of
one of the last holdouts against Mongol
rule in the east, the island nation of
Japan. The first Mongol attempt to capture
Japan had ended in failure, although they
had briefly occupied the islands of Tsushima
and Iki. Although they had inherited a large
navy from the Jin and Song, and the Koreans who
they had recently subjugated, the Mongols were
not used to naval warfare, and struggled to seize
a credible hold on any land in Japan. This time, in
the second invasion of 1280, Kublai sent a larger
force of perhaps 30,000 soldiers, and ordered the
construction of a grand fleet that was probably
at that time the largest in the world. He was
determined to seize a bridgehead from which
a larger force could spread out over the whole
of Japan. The armada of as many as
4,000 ships sailed from the port of
Masan in Korea, and from China, leaving
from Ningbo at the mouth of the Yangtse
River. They chose the landing site of
Hakata Bay, near the modern city of Fukuoka,
which sits on the large Japanese island of Kyushu,
just 200 km off the coast of Korea. But Japanese
resistance would be fierce. They had learned
the lessons of the first invasion, and spent
the intervening years preparing, even building
a strong defensive wall surrounding Hakata Bay.
When the Mongols landed, they brought
all the technological might of China with
them. The Japanese source, the Hachiman Gudokun,
describes the challenge of dealing with these
terrifying weapons, and notes with scorn the
Mongols’ lack of adherence to the traditional
conventions of warfare. They sent iron bombshells
flying against us, which made our side dizzy and
confused. Our soldiers were frightened out
of their wits by the thundering explosions.
Their eyes were blinded, their ears deafened, so that
they could hardly distinguish east from west.
According to our manner of fighting, we must first
call out by name someone from the enemy ranks, and
then attack in single combat. But they took no
notice at all of such conventions. They rushed
forward all together in a mass, grappling with
any individuals they could catch, and killing them.
Many of the invading soldiers
were Chinese, not Mongol, and they had
little stake in this conflict.
Many deserted or surrendered
when the fighting got tough. The Mongols fought
for two months at Hakata Bay in a kind of bitter
stalemate. They were unable to make any headway
against the Japanese defenses, while the Japanese,
too, struggled to dislodge them entirely.
Then on the 15th of August, fate intervened.
A powerful typhoon swept in from
the west, a common occurrence in late summer
in Southeast Asia. The storm struck the Mongol
fleet anchored off the coast, causing severe
destruction. The Venetian Marco Polo describes
the outcome. Now it happened one day that such
a gale was blowing from the north that the troops
declared that if they did not get away, all their
ships would be wrecked. So they all embarked and
left the island, and put out to sea. And let me
tell you that when they had sailed about four miles,
the gale began to freshen, and there was such a
crowd of ships that many of them were smashed by
colliding with one another. Thousands of soldiers
were left clinging to debris or swept ashore by
the force of the storm. Japanese warriors walked
up and down the beaches, killing all Mongols
they could find, only sparing the Chinese, who
they believed had been forced into participating
in the invasion. To the Japanese, this typhoon was
no accident. It was the kamikaze, or divine wind,
that had been sent by the gods to smash the
Mongol invaders and protect the lands of Japan.
To Kublai Khan, this further crushing loss was
a disaster from which his morale would never
fully recover. In Burma, too, the Mongols
succeeded in toppling the empire of Bagan, but
the humid, tropical environment in the south of
the country soon defeated them, along with its
host of tropical diseases. The Mongols had now
found the geographic bounds of their expansion.
There was no more treasure left to plunder,
no more lands left to seize. All that was left to
do was turn against one another and collapse from
within. The Great Khan Kublai died on the 18th of
February 1294, and his death would begin the
slow decline of Mongol power in Asia. In China,
nine further Khans followed the reign of Kublai,
but their reigns were largely short, unstable,
and characterized by widespread incompetence,
corruption, and famine. Kublai's successor, his
grandson Temur Oljeitu, died without an heir, and
a period of struggle followed that led to
to growing resentment among China's people.
Meanwhile, the Mongols who remained back in
the Mongolian steppe increasingly viewed these
emperors as foreigners who had forgotten their
old way of life, and began to ignore the rule of
the Great Khan in China. The last emperor of
the Yuan Dynasty ascended the throne in the
year 1333. His name was Toghon Temur, and it's in
his hands that the Yuan Dynasty would truly
disintegrate. Toghon Temur came to the
throne at the age of thirteen and ruled for 33
years, but as a young boy emperor, he mostly
left the business of governing to his corrupt
officials, and when he came of age, he saw
little reason to change that. During his
reign, he presided over a China rife with
discord and instability. Banditry became
rampant, with the weakened Yuan armies unable to
restore order. On top of this increasing discord,
it was during these decades that the
Black Death arrived in earnest, and moved
with shocking speed and lethality through the
population of China and the rest of the Mongol
world. The very trade routes that
had made the Mongols rich over the
last century now became conduits
through which the disease flowed
unchecked. During the 14th century, it's
estimated that China would lose between
a half and two-thirds of its population to this plague.
One later Chinese source describes the effect of this
disease. In the autumn, there was a great
epidemic. The victim first developed a hard
lump below the armpits or between the thighs,
or else coughed thin blood, and died before
they had time to take medicine. There were
whole families wiped out, with none to bury them.
From the late 1290s onward, the countryside
endured a truly baffling intensity of natural
disasters, including droughts, floods of the Yellow
River, plagues of locusts, snow storms, torrential
rains, typhoons, landslides, earthquakes, and
even the reported appearance of dragons
over the skies of China. These extreme weather
events were partly driven by global weather
conditions and the medieval climate shift
known as the Little Ice Age, but throughout
this period of hardship, the Yuan government's
ineffective policies made everything worse, and
before long, its people became convinced that
the Yuan Mongols had lost the Mandate of Heaven.
The later Chinese source, The History of Ming
or Mingshi, describes the collapse of central
order. At this time, the Yuan government was
no longer in control, and bandits rose up
on all sides. They amassed armies of several
myriads each, and they all appointed generals
and commanders who slaughtered the officials
and invaded the prefectures and districts.
Still other bandits collected
their swarms of soldiers, and
took possession of various placeson
the sea coast. The world was in chaos.
By 1351, popular hatred of
China's Mongol rulers erupted
in a major peasant uprising that
would become known by the scarlet
headgear that its fighters wore. It
was called the Red Turban Rebellions.
The Red Turbans were a large coalition
of different groups, many motivated by
a religious conviction that the end of
the world was coming, that the prophesied
final Buddha, named Maitreya, would soon arrive
and bring an end to all suffering. These
rebels met at night in clandestine
meetings, and recruited followers
from among the workers conscripted to dig
the Grand Canal. It was soon a nationwide
uprising. By 1351, the rebels had seized several
cities, and even the old Song capital of Kaifeng
fell into the hands of one Red Turban group.
In the midst of all this chaos, the famine
and plague passed through the village of
one young man living in the valley of the
river Huai, right in the center of China. He was
barely more than a boy, born into the depths of
the poverty-stricken peasantry. His name was
Zhu Yuanzhang. The History of Ming describes
this tragedy. Drought, locusts, and pestilence
came. At that time, he was seventeen years of age.
His father, mother, and eldest brother all died in
succession. The survivors were too poor to be
able to provide a proper burial for the dead.He
was now alone, with no one on whom he could lean.
This orphaned boy would join a Buddhist
monastery, but from there was swept up in the
rising groundswell of rebellion, and
when he was old enough, he joined the
Red Turban Rebellion. Eventually
he would rise through the ranks
of this rebel insurgency, and then break away
to form his own army. To the astonishment of
the Mongols, this peasant general even
captured the large and important city
of Nanjing. After this victory, he announced
a war of national liberation in the following
terms. It used to be said that the Yuan or
Mongols, who came from the regions of the north,
conquered our empire, not so much by their
courage and skill as by the aid of Heaven,
and now it is sufficiently plain that
heaven itself wishes to deprive them
of that empire. The time has come to
drive these foreigners out of China.
Such was the weakened state of the Yuan Dynasty
that much of Zhu Yuanzhang's energy was spent
fighting not the Mongols, but other Chinese
rivals among the Red Turbans. But after years
of war, he finally won supremacy over all other
rebel groups. On the 20th of January 1368, Zhu
Yuanzhang formerly claimed the Mandate
of Heaven, and declared himself the emperor
of China. He announced the beginning of a new
dynasty that he called the Ming, meaning bright
or brilliant, and this orphaned peasant would go
down in history with the name of the Hongwu
emperor. With his rule now secure, he
declared his intentions to march north
and against the Mongol capital
of Khanbaliq, as the History of Ming recounts.
On the 9th of November, the emperor
summoned his generals to discuss an expedition
to the north. He said, “The Yuan reign will soon
be over, and North China is already in ruins.
Now we shall strike northward and rescue the
living from flood and flame. Let us take our
veterans of a 100 battles, pit them against their
long-untried soldiers, and strike directly at the
Yuan capital. So great is our force that
this can be done as easily as splitting bamboo.”
In August of 1368,
the Ming forces arrived in the
region of Beijing, and at the sight of
the army, the Khan's capital of Khanbaliq
surrendered without a fight. Beijing was now in
the hands of the Chinese, little more than 150
years since Chinggis Khan had sacked it. The later
Mongol chronicle, the Altan Tobchi, attributes the
following lament to the last Khan of China, Toghon
Temur, using the Chinese name Daidu for the capital.
My Daidu, straight and wonderfully made of
various jewels, the summer residence
of ancient Khans. My dear Daidu that I've lost
on the year of the bald red rabbit…nobles
born foolish cared not for their state.
I was left alone, weeping. I became like
a calf left behind on its native pastures.
Kublai the Wise Khan spent his summers
there. They besieged and took precious
Daidu. I have lost the whole of it to China.
Next, the Hongwu emperor turned his
sights on the heartland of the Mongols,
the great steppe itself, and the city that the
Chinese called Ho-Lin, the Mongol capital of
Karakorum. With vengeance in their hearts, the Ming
marched out into the steppe and arrived at the
walls of Karakorum in 1372. After a period of
bitter resistance, they occupied the city, as
the Mingshi recalls. On the 1st of March, the
Duke of Wei was appointed commander-in-chief
of the expedition against the enemy slaves. They
were to campaign northward into the sandy desert.
He was to depart from the Yanmen Pass and race
onto Ho-Lin. On the 29th, Li Wen-chung defeated the
Yuan forces at the Orkhon River. On the 18th
of May, Lan Yu attacked and smashed the Yuan
hereditary ruler. He captured his younger son and
concubines, princesses, princes, dukes, and others of
lower rank, totaling several tens of thousands
of people. He then returned to the capital.
The timeline of the destruction of Karakorum is
uncertain, but it was likely burned and sacked
again in 1380, although by this point, there would
have been few people left living there. The city
had always been a figment of one Great Khan's
imagination, and when it lost its status as capital,
it had been in a state of decline for years. Now
the final death blow was delivered, and though it
would resurge a number of times, its ruins would
eventually crumble back into the grasses of the
steppe. In the centuries that followed, its
stones were taken and reused to create the
Buddhist monastery of Erdene Zu, which now
sits over its ruin. The destruction was so
total that for centuries, the location of the
city of the Khans was lost, until in the 19th
century, Russian archaeologists uncovered
certain inscriptions in the area of the
monastery that identified the site. Today, the
only sign that the city ever stood there at
all is the mounds of earth covered in the
grasses of the steppe, stretching out to the
north of the Erdene Zu monastery, and among them, a
single stone tortoise, one of the four that once
stood at the four corners of the city, symbols
of everlasting eternity. Now it stands alone
in the grasslands of Mongolia, an ironic statement
about an empire that rose so far and fell so fast.
Across the rest of the Mongol world, the
dissolution of their rule was sometimes
gradual, but just as total. In Persia and
the Middle East, the rulers of the
Ilkhanate descended from the Ilkhan Hulagu, sacker of
Baghdad, would suffer a similar fate. They would
convert to Islam and adopt many of the ways
of life of their Persian and Arab subjects.
During their reign, Persia would experience
something of a golden age, creating hybrid
styles of architecture that would be repeated
around the world, especially in the India of the
Mughals. They resurrected the language of Persian,
which had until then been supplanted by Arabic
as a language of administration and literature,
and commissioned a gloriously illustrated copy
of the epic work known as the Shahnama, or
the Book of Kings, and they commissioned the
historian Rashid ad-Din to write his work, the
Compendium of Chronicles, the first attempted
history of the world ever written, and which we
have heard much from in this episode. But their
time, too, would pass. The ninth and final ruler of
the Ilkhanate was named Abu Sa'id Bahadur Khan. He
died in 1335, either a victim of the Black Death
or poisoned by one of his wives. After that, the
Ilkhanate disintegrated rapidly into severalstates,
which were soon swallowed up by the Timurid
and Safavid empires. The Chaghatai Kharnate, in the
former lands of the Khwarazmian Empire and Kazakhstan,
also followed a similar fate, and were snatched
up by the warlord named Timur. When his empire
collapsed in turn, the region was given over to
local powers. During this time, many of the cities
damaged by the Mongols, like Samarqand and Bukhara,
enjoyed a kind of revival, and became once again
wealthy trading stops along the Silk Road. But in
the 15th and 16th centuries, as Europeans opened up
trading routes by sea and bypassed the Silk Road
entirely, these cities slowly began to lose their
relevance. Eventually, merchants stopped
coming. The booming markets grew quiet,
and many of these cities were abandoned. The
destructive power of the economy eventually
left these cities in ruins more
effectively than the Mongols ever had.
In the western steppe of Kazakhstan,
Ukraine, and Russia, the Golden Horde, founded by
the descendants of Chinggis Khan's oldest son Jochi,
was the dominant power for three centuries, but it
eventually weakened under the ravages of the Black
Death and the competing rivalries of the descendants
of Jochi. Eventually it split into more than
half a dozen smaller Khanates during the
15th century. The lands were divided between
the Kazakh Kharnate, the Kharnate of Kazan, the
Astrakhan Kharnate, the Crimean Kharnate, the
Kharnate of Sibir, the Great Horde, the Nogai
Horde, and the White Horde, and the steppe
once more looked much as it had in
the time before Chinggis Khan had united
it, a warring mess of competing nomadic
states. Throughout this time, the Mongols had
favored one Russian city above all others,
and had allowed it to gather taxes from the whole
region on their behalf. This city was Muscovy, which we
know today as Moscow. Eventually Muscovy would break
out from under Mongol control, and bring the other
city states in the region under its banner, until
in 1547 it founded its own kingdom, the Tsardom of
Russia. The Russian Tsars would
advance into the steppe, now armed with
muskets. For the first time in nearly 5,000
years, the steppe horse archer was no longer
the deadliest entity on the planet, and with
the rise of powerful centralized nations, and
the crack of powder and shot, the retreat
of the nomads quietly began. The Industrial
Revolution sealed their fate. Soon, railways
would carve through the wilderness, and the
sound of repeating rifles echoed across the steppe.
These technological innovations finally allowed
settled peoples to push into the most remote and
untamed territories where once only nomads had
roamed. Even the fiercest of nomadic
warrior peoples were subdued by this
new age. The ancient rhythm of nomadic
incursions, which had ebbed and flowed
for millennia, finally came to an end,
and the wild heart of the steppe grew still.
In the 170 years or so between Chinggis
Khan's first conquests and the collapse of the
Yuan Dynasty, the Mongols had reshaped the
structure of the world. Old power centers had
been swept away, and in their place, new nations
would begin to rise; Russia, Iran, Mughal India, and
the newly-united China. The Mongols have left
their mark everywhere, from a vast genetic
legacy to the names that many of us have today.
At this time, the Turco-Mongolian word for ruler,
Khan, is one of the world's most
popular surnames, belonging to more
than 23 million people worldwide, and it is
the 12th most common surname in the United
Kingdom. It's in China that they left
perhaps their greatest legacy. In some ways, the
Mongols invented the modern concept of China,
uniting its two halves, along with Tibet and
Manchuria, making up the borders of the modern
nation today. But on the Chinese people, the
psychological effect of the Mongol conquest
and occupation was immense, and the centuries
that followed would be characterized by a great
turning inwards. The China of the Song Dynasty had
been inventive and outward-looking, seeking new
technologies and foreign influences, but
the Ming Dynasty that took its place was
paranoid and suspicious of change. While
the Song had experimented with innovative
and modern economic systems, the Ming went
backwards, reverting to a more feudal society to
deal with the damage left by the Mongols. This
inward-looking mentality is perhaps nowhere
better demonstrated than in the project
that would take up much of the 15th and 16th
centuries; that is the building of the Great Wall.
While China had built defensive walls for
more than a thousand years at this point, it was
in the Ming period that the true Great Wall as we
know it today took its shape. This snaking line of
elegant fortifications runs for nearly 9,000 km
across the northern border of China, turning the
entire land into a fortress. Using an estimated
100 million tons of building material, the Ming
Great Wall is the equivalent of building the great
pyramid of Giza nearly fifty times. For much of this
era, the construction of the Great Wall occupied an
enormous part of the labor, economy, and political
will of successive Chinese governments. The cost
was so great that the Ming diverted funds from
other parts of their budget, especially from their
fleets of ships. The Ming had inherited one of the
largest fleets in the world, with thousands
of large vessels, many larger than any ship
being built in Europe at the time. These had been
used on voyages of exploration to India, Arabia,
and Africa, but in the 15th century, the Ming
dismantled much of this naval power, and even
burned some of the ships in harbor to save costs.
The historian James Waterson describes this inward
turn. After China's painful experience with the
foreign invaders, it is no coincidence that the
Ming worked hard to seal off the world beyond
their Great Wall, and to build it ever stronger
in the post-Mongol period. The Ming suffered
a self-inflicted wound by their efforts to
seclude their state from the rest of the world,
and in doing so, effectively missed out on
modernity. But while China looked inwards
and built their Great Wall, on the other
side of the continent, another
people looked outwards. While China
burned its ships, another people were
building them. These were the people who
were undoubtedly the biggest winners of the
Mongol invasions, and who were now positioned
to embark on a wave of conquests of
their own. Those were the people of
Europe. While Eastern European lands in the
areas of modern Poland, Hungary, and Russia
had all suffered from Mongol incursions, the
kingdoms of Western Europe in France, England,
Spain, and Portugal had escaped unscathed, and
on top of that, they had reaped a huge number
of benefits. The anthropologist Jack Weatherford
makes the following argument. Although never ruled
by the Mongols, in many ways Europe gained the most
from their world system. The Europeans received all
the benefits of trade, technology transfer, and
the global awakening without paying the cost of
Mongol conquest. The Europeans, who had been cut off
from the mainstream of civilization since the fall
of Rome, eagerly drank in the new knowledge, put on
the new clothes, listened to the new music, ate the
new foods, and enjoyed a rapidly-escalating
standard of living in almost every regard.
Europe was fascinated by the Mongols and
their vast world-spanning Empire. In Italy,
people even started giving their children
Mongol names, with one, Grande Can, meaning
Great Khan, being especially popular. The Mongols
had caused Europeans to come into contact with
Chinese technologies that might have otherwise
taken them centuries more to encounter, among
them, Chinese paper, the compass, and gunpowder.
The Elizabethan English writer Francis Bacon
commented on the transformative effect that
these Chinese technologies had on European
society. We should notice the force, effect, and
consequences of inventions which are nowhere
more conspicuous than in those three which
were unknown to the ancients; namely printing,
gunpowder, and the compass, for these three
have changed the appearance and state of
the whole world, first in literature, then
in warfare, and lastly in navigation, and
innumerable changes have been thence derived
so that no empire, sect, or star appears to
have exercised a greater power and influence on
human affairs than these mechanical discoveries.
The Mongol conquests helped Europe in another way,
too; that is in broadening its horizons. The text of
the travels of Marco Polo was still being printed
in the 15th century when an Italian navigator
bought a copy in a Genoise bookshop. The text had
a transformative effect on him. This copy he would
read over and over, with an obsessive
attention to detail, even leaving handwritten
annotations in its margins. This navigator dreamed
of one day visiting the lands of the Far East
himself, and the court of the Great Khan that he
had read about. His name was Christopher Columbus,
and he, too, would change the course of history. In
the journal that he kept on his voyage westwards,
he wrote to King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella
of Spain that he wanted to reach this far-off
place. In this present month, in consequence
of the information which I had given Your
Highnesses respecting the countries of India
and of a prince, called Great Khan, which in our
language signifies king of kings, Your Highnesses
determined to send me, Christopher Columbus, to
the above-mentioned countries of India, to see the said
princes, people, and territories, and to learn their
disposition. With the Chinese invention
of gunpowder, by this point, Europeans
had already developed or adopted cannons,
muskets, and arquebuses, and with these in the
coming century, they would conquer vast swathes
of land in the Americas and all around the world.
The age of European colonialism, and the
following 500 years of European power around
the globe, all found their roots in the fertile
soil left behind after the inferno of the Mongol
conquests. In his work, The Canterbury Tales,
the first book published in the English
language, written around the year 1390, the
author Geoffrey Chaucer relates one legend
associated with Chinggis Khan, and writes
in the following glowing terms about his
legacy. This noble king was called Genghis Khan,
who in his time was of so great renown that
there was nowhere in no region so excellent
a lord at all things. He lacked nothing that
belonged to a king. As of the sect of
which he was born, he kept his law to
which he was sworn, and there, too, he was
hardy, wise, and rich, and kept always so well
royal estate that there was nowhere suchanother
man. This noble king, this Tartar, Genghis Khan.
In 1876, the Russian traveler Nikolai Mikhailovich
Przhevalskii traveled to Mongolia, hoping to find
there traces of the great Khans of old, and perhaps
even find the lost burial place of Chinggis Khan
himself. But he found himself disappointed at
what he saw. All he found was the vast, empty
grasslands and deserts, broken
by rocky mounds of stone, and
the only evidence of past greatness he
could find was in the people's stories.
The effect of these bare yellow hillocks
is most dreary and depressing when you are among
them, and can see nothing but the sky and the sand.
No sounds are heard, not even the chirping of the
grasshopper. The silence of the tomb surrounds
you. No wonder that the local Mongols relate
some marvelous stories about these frightful
deserts. They tell you that this was the scene
of the principal exploit of Chinggis Khan, and
here warriors fought against the Chinese, and
slew countless numbers of people, whose bodies
God caused the winds to cover with the sand
from the desert. To this day, the Mongols relate
with superstitious awe how groans and cries may
be heard in the sands of Kuzupchi, from the spirits
of the departed, and that every now and then, the
winds which stir up the sands expose to view
different treasures such as silver dishes, which
may not be taken away, because death immediately
overtakes the bold man who would venture to touch
them. Wherever Przhevalskii traveled,
he found legends about Chinggis
Khan still circulating on the lips of
Mongol people. Some even told him of a
prophecy, that the Great Khan would one day
return and once again lead his people to
greatness. Chinggis Khan's memory is better
preserved in Ordos than in any part of Mongolia.
We heard more tales here about the conqueror
than anywhere else. The Mongols reckon that 650
years have elapsed since his death, leaving 150
to 350 years more before his coming resurrection.
The same people assert that on the very day of the
accomplishments of this miracle, some hero will be
born in China with whom Chinghiz Khan will do battle,
subdue him, and lead his people from Ordos to what
is now called the land of the Khalkas, the native
country of the Mongols. And if Przhevalskii hoped
to find the grave of Chinggis Khan, he would also
be disappointed. If anyone did know where his body
was to be found, Przhevalskii found that even after so
many centuries, the Mongolian people still weren't
telling. We could not discover the name of the
temple where Chinghiz Khan is said to be buried.
The Mongols, for some reason or other, would
not divulge it. In the 20th century, a communist
government seized power in Mongolia, and
in close cooperation with the Soviet Union, engaged
in purges of some 30,000 Mongolians, including
thousands of Buddhist monks. Many of the victims
were from one clan who still traced their descent
back to Chinggis Khan. The Soviets were haunted by
the ghost of the Great Khan, fearing that he might
become a rallying point for Mongolian nationalists.
For this reason, they worked hard to destroy
any relics associated with him, closing Buddhist
monasteries, and trying to erase all memory of the
Great Khan. But the Soviet-aligned government did
maintain one aspect of Mongolian tradition. For 800
years, successive Mongolian rulers had maintained
the law against anyone entering the region
of the sacred mountain Burkan Khaldun, the site
where Chinggis Khan is most likely buried. For
centuries, this land would be known as the Yeke Qorig,
or great taboo. When the Communists seized power, they
feared that this region would become a pilgrimage
site and a focus of Mongolian nationalism. For this
reason, the Soviet-aligned government maintained
the ancient prohibition on entering it. The region
of the great taboo was renamed and called simply
the Highly Restricted Area. They built a top-secret
air base there for the use of Soviet planes, and
most likely a stockpile of nuclear weapons, so
that even in the modern era, the land cannot
be entered without special permissions, and the
grave of Chinggis Khan remains un-found to this day.
I want to end the episode with a reading from
a piece of Chinese poetry written during this
time by a poet from the southern Song Dynasty. His
name was Wen Tianxiang. Wen had been a government
minister in Song China, and after witnessing the
destruction of his land, he led the resistance
against the Mongol invaders. He was eventually
captured and held in a Mongol prison. Despite
all the tortures and deprivations that he suffered,
he never wavered in his resistance. It was during
this time of imprisonment that he wrote one of his
masterpieces, titled Crossing the Sea of Solitude.
As you listen, consider the contradictions and
paradoxes of this time, a time of discovery and
exploration, a time of new ideas and unforeseen
encounters, but also a time of incalculable sorrow,
as the great powers of the world crumbled, and a
new world order took shape. Imagine the hollowed
halls and shattered walls, the empty markets of
Samarqand, Nishapur, and Bukhara. Imagine the gutted palaces
and empty temples of Beijing and Hangchow. Imagine
the emptied streets and burned-out houses, the
crumbling libraries of Baghdad and Aleppo,
and the fallen churches of Novgorod and Kiev,
and finally, at the end of it all, the windswept
grasses growing through the stones of Karakorum.
Imagine the world as you know it coming to
an end, and a new one rising from the ashes.
Through painstaking mastery
of the Classics, I have risen high; but four
years of raging war have well nigh brought
all round destitution and ruin. My shattered
country does remind me of willow catkins
swept by wind. In my life I sink or swim
like duckweed beaten by rain. Through
the frightful shallows we fought our
way. They tell us now of the frightful
battle never won, but on the lonely ocean
I could but sigh, for being captured and all
alone. Down through the ages, who that ever lived
has not met with death? I wish only to leave my
loyal heart shining red in history's great book.
Thank you once again for listening to The Fall
of Civilizations Podcast. I'd like to thank
my voice actors for this episode; Michael
Hajiantonis, Lachlan Lucas, Alexandra Boulton,
Tom Marshall-Lee, Chris Harvey, Nick Denton,
Henry Stenhouse, Amrit Sandhu, Peter Walters,
Matthew Bidulph, Garrett Caver, Sebastian Baltzerolo,
and Paul Casselle. Readings in Arabic were performed
by Oussama Taher; readings in Chinese by Richard Teng;
readings from The Secret History of the Mongols
in Mongolian were performed by Uiles Efinhalha.
The title theme is Home At Last by John Bartman.
I'd also like to thank my historical advisers for
this episode, Toby Jones of the Oriental Institute
of the Czech Academy of Sciences, and Jack Wilson
of the Central European University, Vienna. You can
find Toby on Twitter @TobiasBahadur, and if
you're interested in more information about the
Mongols, Jack runs a YouTube channel called Jackmeister:
Mongol History, where he explores many
of the myths and misconceptions surrounding the
Mongols. My book, Fall of Civilizations: Stories of
Greatness and Decline, is now out in the United
States, and American readers can get it from all
good bookstores. I love to hear your thoughts
and responses on Bluesky, so please come and tell
me what you thought. You can follow me at Paul
MM Cooper, and if you'd like updates about the
podcast, announcements about new episodes, as
well as images, maps, and reading suggestions,
you can follow the podcast at Fall_of_Civ_Pod. This
podcast can only keep going with the support of
our generous subscribers on Patreon. You keep me
running, you help me cover my costs, and help
keep the podcast ad-free. You also let me dedicate
more time to researching, writing, recording, and
editing, to get the episodes out to you faster,
and bring as much life and detail to them as
possible. I want to thank all my subscribers for
making this happen. If you enjoyed this episode,
please consider heading on to patreon.com/
fallofcivilizations_podcast, or just Google
Fall of Civilizations Patreon. That's P-A-T-R-E-O-N.
For now, all the best, and thanks for listening.